A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Cerebrum)	Junyue Cao1, Diana R. O’Day, [] Jay Shendure	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_cerebrum	Homo sapiens	1751246	14GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Cerebellum)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_cerebellum	Homo sapiens	1092000	9GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Adrenal)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_adrenal	Homo sapiens	387771	2GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Sampled)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_sampled	Homo sapiens	377456	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Construction of a human cell landscape at single-cell level (Adult)	Xiaoping Han, Ziming Zhou, [] Dan Zhang & Guoji Guo	Single-cell analysis is a valuable tool for dissecting cellular heterogeneity in complex systems1. However, a comprehensive single-cell atlas has not been achieved for humans. Here we use single-cell mRNA sequencing to determine the cell-type composition of all major human organs and construct a scheme for the human cell landscape (HCL). We have uncovered a single-cell hierarchy for many tissues that have not been well characterized. We established a ‘single-cell HCL analysis’ pipeline that helps to define human cell identity. Finally, we performed a single-cell comparative analysis of landscapes from human and mouse to identify conserved genetic networks. We found that stem and progenitor cells exhibit strong transcriptomic stochasticity, whereas differentiated cells are more distinct. Our results provide a useful resource for the study of human biology.	100	GSE134355_adult	Homo sapiens	344000	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung-resident cell populations in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis	Taylor S. Adams, Jonas C. Schupp, [] Naftali Kaminski	We provide a single-cell atlas of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), a fatal interstitial lung disease, by profiling 312,928 cells from 32 IPF, 28 smoker and nonsmoker controls, and 18 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) lungs. Among epithelial cells enriched in IPF, we identify a previously unidentified population of aberrant basaloid cells that coexpress basal epithelial, mesenchymal, senescence, and developmental markers and are located at the edge of myofibroblast foci in the IPF lung. Among vascular endothelial cells, we identify an ectopically expanded cell population transcriptomically identical to bronchial restricted vascular endothelial cells in IPF. We confirm the presence of both populations by immunohistochemistry and independent datasets. Among stromal cells, we identify IPF myofibroblasts and invasive fibroblasts with partially overlapping cells in control and COPD lungs. Last, we confirm previous findings of profibrotic macrophage populations in the IPF lung. Our comprehensive catalog reveals the complexity and diversity of aberrant cellular populations in IPF.	40	GSE136831	Homo sapiens	312928	8GB	RNA	Raw count
Transcriptional and cellular diversity of the human heart	Tucker, Nathan R and Chaffin, [] Irinna and others	The human heart requires a complex ensemble of specialized cell types to perform its essential function. A greater knowledge of the intricate cellular milieu of the heart is critical to increase our understanding of cardiac homeostasis and pathology. As recent advances in low input RNAsequencing have allowed definitions of cellular transcriptomes at single cell resolution at scale, here we have applied these approaches to assess the cellular and transcriptional diversity of the non-failing human heart.	40	SCP498	Homo sapiens	287269	2GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Epithelial cell)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_epithelial	Homo sapiens	282262	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Construction of a human cell landscape at single-cell level (Fetal)	Xiaoping Han, Ziming Zhou, [] Dan Zhang & Guoji Guo	Single-cell analysis is a valuable tool for dissecting cellular heterogeneity in complex systems1. However, a comprehensive single-cell atlas has not been achieved for humans. Here we use single-cell mRNA sequencing to determine the cell-type composition of all major human organs and construct a scheme for the human cell landscape (HCL). We have uncovered a single-cell hierarchy for many tissues that have not been well characterized. We established a ‘single-cell HCL analysis’ pipeline that helps to define human cell identity. Finally, we performed a single-cell comparative analysis of landscapes from human and mouse to identify conserved genetic networks. We found that stem and progenitor cells exhibit strong transcriptomic stochasticity, whereas differentiated cells are more distinct. Our results provide a useful resource for the study of human biology.	100	GSE134355_fetal	Homo sapiens	254266	1GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Lung)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_lung	Homo sapiens	217738	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Decoding human fetal liver haematopoiesis	Dorin-Mirel Popescu, Rachel A. Botting, [] Muzlifah Haniffa	Definitive haematopoiesis in the fetal liver supports self-renewal and differentiation of haematopoietic stem cells and multipotent progenitors (HSC/MPPs) but remains poorly defined in humans. Here, using single-cell transcriptome profiling of approximately 140,000 liver and 74,000 skin, kidney and yolk sac cells, we identify the repertoire of human blood and immune cells during development. We infer differentiation trajectories from HSC/MPPs and evaluate the influence of the tissue microenvironment on blood and immune cell development. We reveal physiological erythropoiesis in fetal skin and the presence of mast cells, natural killer and innate lymphoid cell precursors in the yolk sac. We demonstrate a shift in the haemopoietic composition of fetal liver during gestation away from being predominantly erythroid, accompanied by a parallel change in differentiation potential of HSC/MPPs, which we functionally validate. Our integrated map of fetal liver haematopoiesis provides a blueprint for the study of paediatric blood and immune disorders, and a reference for harnessing the therapeutic potential of HSC/MPPs.	100	E-MTAB-7407	Homo sapiens	214295	11GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA sequencing demonstrates the molecular and cellular reprogramming of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma	Kim, Nayoung and Kim, [] Hye Hyeon and others	Advanced metastatic cancer poses utmost clinical challenges and may present molecular and cellular features distinct from an early-stage cancer. Herein, we present single-cell transcriptome profiling of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma, the most prevalent histological lung cancer type diagnosed at stage IV in over 40% of all cases. From 208,506 cells populating the normal tissues or early to metastatic stage cancer in 44 patients, we identify a cancer cell subtype deviating from the normal differentiation trajectory and dominating the metastatic stage. In all stages, the stromal and immune cell dynamics reveal ontological and functional changes that create a pro-tumoral and immunosuppressive microenvironment. Normal resident myeloid cell populations are gradually replaced with monocyte-derived macrophages and dendritic cells, along with T-cell exhaustion. This extensive single-cell analysis enhances our understanding of molecular and cellular dynamics in metastatic lung cancer and reveals potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets in cancer-microenvironment interactions.	40	GSE131907	Homo sapiens	208506	4GB	RNA	Raw count
Peripheral T cell expansion predicts tumour infiltration and clinical response	Thomas D. Wu, Shravan Madireddi, [] Jane L. Grogan	Despite the resounding clinical success in cancer treatment of antibodies that block the interaction of PD1 with its ligand PDL11, the mechanisms involved remain unknown. A major limitation to understanding the origin and fate of T cells in tumour immunity is the lack of quantitative information on the distribution of individual clonotypes of T cells in patients with cancer. Here, by performing deep single-cell sequencing of RNA and T cell receptors in patients with different types of cancer, we survey the profiles of various populations of T cells and T cell receptors in tumours, normal adjacent tissue, and peripheral blood. We find clear evidence of clonotypic expansion of effector-like T cells not only within the tumour but also in normal adjacent tissue. Patients with gene signatures of such clonotypic expansion respond best to anti-PDL1 therapy. Notably, expanded clonotypes found in the tumour and normal adjacent tissue can also typically be detected in peripheral blood, which suggests a convenient approach to patient identification. Analyses of our data together with several external datasets suggest that intratumoural T cells, especially in responsive patients, are replenished with fresh, non-exhausted replacement cells from sites outside the tumour, suggesting continued activity of the cancer immunity cycle in these patients, the acceleration of which may be associated with clinical response	100	GSE139555	Homo sapiens	195924	4GB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell map of intratumoral changes during anti-PD1 treatment of patients with breast cancer (Cohort 1 - All)	Ayse Bassez, Hanne Vos, [] Diether Lambrechts	Immune-checkpoint blockade (ICB) combined with neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves pathological complete response in breast cancer. To understand why only a subset of tumors respond to ICB, patients with hormone receptor-positive or triple-negative breast cancer were treated with anti-PD1 before surgery. Paired pre- versus on-treatment biopsies from treatment-naive patients receiving anti-PD1 (n = 29) or patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy before anti-PD1 (n = 11) were subjected to single-cell transcriptome, T cell receptor and proteome profiling. One-third of tumors contained PD1-expressing T cells, which clonally expanded upon anti-PD1 treatment, irrespective of tumor subtype. Expansion mainly involved CD8+ T cells with pronounced expression of cytotoxic-activity (PRF1, GZMB), immune-cell homing (CXCL13) and exhaustion markers (HAVCR2, LAG3), and CD4+ T cells characterized by expression of T-helper-1 (IFNG) and follicular-helper (BCL6, CXCR5) markers. In pre-treatment biopsies, the relative frequency of immunoregulatory dendritic cells (PD-L1+), specific macrophage phenotypes (CCR2+ or MMP9+) and cancer cells exhibiting major histocompatibility complex class I/II expression correlated positively with T cell expansion. Conversely, undifferentiated pre-effector/memory T cells (TCF7+, GZMK+) or inhibitory macrophages (CX3CR1+, C3+) were inversely correlated with T cell expansion. Collectively, our data identify various immunophenotypes and associated gene sets that are positively or negatively correlated with T cell expansion following anti-PD1 treatment. We shed light on the heterogeneity in treatment response to anti-PD1 in breast cancer.	40	ayse_et_al_2021_cohort1_all	Homo sapiens	175942	4GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Kidney)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_kidney	Homo sapiens	155386	1GB	RNA	Raw count
The Human and Mouse Enteric Nervous System at Single-Cell Resolution (Human full colon myenteric plexus)	Drokhlyansky, Eugene and Smillie, [] Tatyana and others	The enteric nervous system (ENS) coordinates diverse functions in the intestine but has eluded comprehensive molecular characterization because of the rarity and diversity of cells. Here we develop two methods to profile the ENS of adult mice and humans at single-cell resolution: RAISIN RNA-seq for profiling intact nuclei with ribosome-bound mRNA and MIRACL-seq for label-free enrichment of rare cell types by droplet-based profiling. The 1,187,535 nuclei in our mouse atlas include 5,068 neurons from the ileum and colon, revealing extraordinary neuron diversity. We highlight circadian expression changes in enteric neurons, show that disease-related genes are dysregulated with aging, and identify differences between the ileum and proximal/distal colon. In humans, we profile 436,202 nuclei, recovering 1,445 neurons, and identify conserved and species-specific transcriptional programs and putative neuro-epithelial, neuro-stromal, and neuro-immune interactions. The human ENS expresses risk genes for neuropathic, inflammatory, and extra-intestinal diseases, suggesting neuronal contributions to disease.	40	SCP1038_human_colon	Homo sapiens	153941	6GB	RNA	Raw count
Developmental cell programs are co-opted in inflammatory skin disease (Epidermal non-immune)	Gary Reynolds, Peter Vegh, [] Muzlifah Haniffa	The skin confers biophysical and immunological protection through a complex cellular network established early in embryonic development. We profiled the transcriptomes of more than 500,000 single cells from developing human fetal skin, healthy adult skin, and adult skin with atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We leveraged these datasets to compare cell states across development, homeostasis, and disease. Our analysis revealed an enrichment of innate immune cells in skin during the first trimester and clonal expansion of disease-associated lymphocytes in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We uncovered and validated in situ a reemergence of prenatal vascular endothelial cell and macrophage cellular programs in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis lesional skin. These data illustrate the dynamism of cutaneous immunity and provide opportunities for targeting pathological developmental programs in inflammatory skin diseases.	40	Reynolds_et_al_2021_adult_epidermal	Homo sapiens	145185	3GB	RNA	Raw count
Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment (Rhapsody - PBMC)	Jonas Schulte-Schrepping, Nico Reusch, [] Leif Erik Sander	Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a mild to moderate respiratory tract infection, however, a subset of patients progress to severe disease and respiratory failure. The mechanism of protective immunity in mild forms and the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 associated with increased neutrophil counts and dysregulated immune responses remain unclear. In a dual-center, two-cohort study, we combined single-cell RNA-sequencing and single-cell proteomics of whole-blood and peripheral-blood mononuclear cells to determine changes in immune cell composition and activation in mild versus severe COVID-19 (242 samples from 109 individuals) over time. HLA-DRhiCD11chi inflammatory monocytes with an interferon-stimulated gene signature were elevated in mild COVID-19. Severe COVID-19 was marked by occurrence of neutrophil precursors, as evidence of emergency myelopoiesis, dysfunctional mature neutrophils, and HLA-DRlo monocytes. Our study provides detailed insights into the systemic immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals profound alterations in the myeloid cell compartment associated with severe COVID-19.	40	jonas_et_al_2020_rhapsody_pbmc	Homo sapiens	139848	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Developmental cell programs are co-opted in inflammatory skin disease (Dermal non-immune)	Gary Reynolds, Peter Vegh, [] Muzlifah Haniffa	The skin confers biophysical and immunological protection through a complex cellular network established early in embryonic development. We profiled the transcriptomes of more than 500,000 single cells from developing human fetal skin, healthy adult skin, and adult skin with atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We leveraged these datasets to compare cell states across development, homeostasis, and disease. Our analysis revealed an enrichment of innate immune cells in skin during the first trimester and clonal expansion of disease-associated lymphocytes in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We uncovered and validated in situ a reemergence of prenatal vascular endothelial cell and macrophage cellular programs in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis lesional skin. These data illustrate the dynamism of cutaneous immunity and provide opportunities for targeting pathological developmental programs in inflammatory skin diseases.	40	Reynold_et_al_2021_adult_dermis	Homo sapiens	136882	3GB	RNA	Raw count
COVID-19 severity correlates with airway epithelium–immune cell interactions identified by single-cell analysis	Robert Lorenz Chua, Soeren Lukassen, [] Roland Eils	To investigate the immune response and mechanisms associated with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), we performed single-cell RNA sequencing on nasopharyngeal and bronchial samples from 19 clinically well-characterized patients with moderate or critical disease and from five healthy controls. We identified airway epithelial cell types and states vulnerable to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. In patients with COVID-19, epithelial cells showed an average three-fold increase in expression of the SARS-CoV-2 entry receptor ACE2, which correlated with interferon signals by immune cells. Compared to moderate cases, critical cases exhibited stronger interactions between epithelial and immune cells, as indicated by ligand–receptor expression profiles, and activated immune cells, including inflammatory macrophages expressing CCL2, CCL3, CCL20, CXCL1, CXCL3, CXCL10, IL8, IL1B and TNF. The transcriptional differences in critical cases compared to moderate cases likely contribute to clinical observations of heightened inflammatory tissue damage, lung injury and respiratory failure. Our data suggest that pharmacologic inhibition of the CCR1 and/or CCR5 pathways might suppress immune hyperactivation in critical COVID-19.	40	chua2020	Homo sapiens	135600	5GB	RNA	Log-normalized
Onco-fetal Reprogramming of Endothelial Cells Drives Immunosuppressive Macrophages in Hepatocellular Carcinoma (14 HCC and 4 fetal liver tissues)	Ankur Sharma, Justine Jia Wen Seow, [] Ramanuj DasGupta	We employed scRNA sequencing to extensively characterize the cellular landscape of human liver from development to disease. Analysis of ∼212,000 cells representing human fetal, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and mouse liver revealed remarkable fetal-like reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment. Specifically, the HCC ecosystem displayed features reminiscent of fetal development, including re-emergence of fetal-associated endothelial cells (PLVAP/VEGFR2) and fetal-like (FOLR2) tumor-associated macrophages. In a cross-species comparative analysis, we discovered remarkable similarity between mouse embryonic, fetal-liver, and tumor macrophages. Spatial transcriptomics further revealed a shared onco-fetal ecosystem between fetal liver and HCC. Furthermore, gene regulatory analysis, spatial transcriptomics, and in vitro functional assays implicated VEGF and NOTCH signaling in maintaining onco-fetal ecosystem. Taken together, we report a shared immunosuppressive onco-fetal ecosystem in fetal liver and HCC. Our results unravel a previously unexplored onco-fetal reprogramming of the tumor ecosystem, provide novel targets for therapeutic interventions in HCC, and open avenues for identifying similar paradigms in other cancers and disease.	40	Sharma_14HCC_and_fetal_liver	Homo sapiens	134443	724MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Immune Landscape of Viral- and Carcinogen-Driven Head and Neck Cancer	Anthony R. Cillo, Cornelius H.L. Kurten, [] Dario A.A. Vignali	Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) arises through exposure to environmental carcinogens or malignant transformation by human papillomavirus (HPV). Here, we assessed the transcriptional profiles of 131,224 single cells from peripheral and intra-tumoral immune populations from patients with HPV– and HPV+ HNSCC and healthy donors. Immune cells within tumors of HPV– and HPV+ HNSCC displayed a spectrum of transcriptional signatures, with helper CD4+ T cells and B cells being relatively divergent and CD8+ T cells and CD4+ regulatory T cells being relatively similar. Transcriptional results were contextualized through multispectral immunofluorescence analyses and evaluating putative cell-cell communication based on spatial proximity. These analyses defined a gene expression signature associated with CD4+ T follicular helper cells that is associated with longer progression-free survival in HNSCC patients. The datasets and analytical approaches herein provide a resource for the further study of the impact of immune cells on viral- and carcinogen-induced cancers.	100	GSE139324	Homo sapiens	132706	3GB	RNA	Raw count
Intra-and inter-cellular rewiring of the human colon during ulcerative colitis (epithelial cells)	Christopher S. Smillie, Moshe Biton, [] Aviv Regev	Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed risk alleles for ulcerative colitis (UC). To understand their cell type specificities and pathways of action, we generate an atlas of 366,650 cells from the colon mucosa of 18 UC patients and 12 healthy individuals, revealing 51 epithelial, stromal, and immune cell subsets, including BEST4 + enterocytes, microfold-like cells, and IL13RA2 + IL11 + inflammatory fibroblasts, which we associate with resistance to anti-TNF treatment. Inflammatory fibroblasts, inflammatory monocytes, microfold-like cells, and T cells that co-express CD8 and IL-17 expand with disease, forming intercellular interaction hubs. Many UC risk genes are cell type specific and co-regulated within relatively few gene modules, suggesting convergence onto limited sets of cell types and pathways. Using this observation, we nominate and infer functions for specific risk genes across GWAS loci. Our work provides a framework for interrogating complex human diseases and mapping risk variants to cell types and pathways.	40	smillie2019.epi	Homo sapiens	123006	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment (Rhapsody - fresh and whole blood)	Jonas Schulte-Schrepping, Nico Reusch, [] Leif Erik Sander	Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a mild to moderate respiratory tract infection, however, a subset of patients progress to severe disease and respiratory failure. The mechanism of protective immunity in mild forms and the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 associated with increased neutrophil counts and dysregulated immune responses remain unclear. In a dual-center, two-cohort study, we combined single-cell RNA-sequencing and single-cell proteomics of whole-blood and peripheral-blood mononuclear cells to determine changes in immune cell composition and activation in mild versus severe COVID-19 (242 samples from 109 individuals) over time. HLA-DRhiCD11chi inflammatory monocytes with an interferon-stimulated gene signature were elevated in mild COVID-19. Severe COVID-19 was marked by occurrence of neutrophil precursors, as evidence of emergency myelopoiesis, dysfunctional mature neutrophils, and HLA-DRlo monocytes. Our study provides detailed insights into the systemic immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals profound alterations in the myeloid cell compartment associated with severe COVID-19.	40	jonas_et_al_2020_rhapsody_freshwb	Homo sapiens	122954	1GB	RNA	Raw count
An immune-cell signature of bacterial sepsis	Miguel Reyes, Michael R. Filbin, [] Nir Hacohen	Dysregulation of the immune response to bacterial infection can lead to sepsis, a condition with high mortality. Multiple whole-blood gene-expression studies have defined sepsis-associated molecular signatures, but have not resolved changes in transcriptional states of specific cell types. Here, we used single-cell RNA-sequencing to profile the blood of people with sepsis (n = 29) across three clinical cohorts with corresponding controls (n = 36). We profiled total peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs, 106,545 cells) and dendritic cells (19,806 cells) across all subjects and, on the basis of clustering of their gene-expression profiles, defined 16 immune-cell states. We identified a unique CD14+ monocyte state that is expanded in people with sepsis and validated its power in distinguishing these individuals from controls using public transcriptomic data from subjects with different disease etiologies and from multiple geographic locations (18 cohorts, n = 1,467 subjects). We identified a panel of surface markers for isolation and quantification of the monocyte state and characterized its epigenomic and functional phenotypes, and propose a model for its induction from human bone marrow. This study demonstrates the utility of single-cell genomics in discovering disease-associated cytologic signatures and provides insight into the cellular basis of immune dysregulation in bacterial sepsis.	100	SCP548	Homo sapiens	122557	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA-sequencing reveals profibrotic roles of distinct epithelial and mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary fibrosis	Habermann, Arun C and Gutierrez, [] Christopher and others	Pulmonary fibrosis is a form of chronic lung disease characterized by pathologic epithelial remodeling and accumulation of extracellular matrix. In order to comprehensively define the cell types, mechanisms and mediators driving fibrotic remodeling in lungs with pulmonary fibrosis, we performed single-cell RNA-sequencing of single-cell suspensions from 10 non-fibrotic control and 20 PF lungs. Analysis of 114,396 cells identified 31 distinct cell types. We report a remarkable shift in epithelial cell phenotypes occurs in the peripheral lung in PF, and identify several previously unrecognized epithelial cell phenotypes including a KRT5−/KRT17+, pathologic ECM-producing epithelial cell population that was highly enriched in PF lungs. Multiple fibroblast subtypes were observed to contribute to ECM expansion in a spatially-discrete manner. Together these data provide high-resolution insights into the complexity and plasticity of the distal lung epithelium in human disease, and indicate a diversity of epithelial and mesenchymal cells contribute to pathologic lung fibrosis.	40	GSE135893	Homo sapiens	114396	1GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Liver)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_liver	Homo sapiens	113138	502MB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Blood)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_blood	Homo sapiens	103766	460MB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Heart)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_heart	Homo sapiens	101749	431MB	RNA	Raw count
Integration of eQTL and a Single-Cell Atlas in the Human Eye Identifies Causal Genes for Age-Related Macular Degeneration	Orozco, Luz D and Chen, [] Zora and others	Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a leading cause of vision loss. To better understand disease pathogenesis and identify causal genes in GWAS loci for AMD risk, we present a comprehensive database of human retina and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Our database comprises macular and non-macular RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) profiles from 129 donors, a genome-wide expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) dataset that includes macula-specific retina and RPE/choroid, and single-nucleus RNA-seq (NucSeq) from human retina and RPE with subtype resolution from more than 100,000 cells. Using NucSeq, we find enriched expression of AMD candidate genes in RPE cells. We identify 15 putative causal genes for AMD on the basis of co-localization of genetic association signals for AMD risk and eye eQTL, including the genes TSPAN10 and TRPM1. These results demonstrate the value of our human eye database for elucidating genetic pathways and potential therapeutic targets for ocular diseases.	40	GSE135133	Homo sapiens	100055	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment (10X - PBMC)	Jonas Schulte-Schrepping, Nico Reusch, [] Leif Erik Sander	Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a mild to moderate respiratory tract infection, however, a subset of patients progress to severe disease and respiratory failure. The mechanism of protective immunity in mild forms and the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 associated with increased neutrophil counts and dysregulated immune responses remain unclear. In a dual-center, two-cohort study, we combined single-cell RNA-sequencing and single-cell proteomics of whole-blood and peripheral-blood mononuclear cells to determine changes in immune cell composition and activation in mild versus severe COVID-19 (242 samples from 109 individuals) over time. HLA-DRhiCD11chi inflammatory monocytes with an interferon-stimulated gene signature were elevated in mild COVID-19. Severe COVID-19 was marked by occurrence of neutrophil precursors, as evidence of emergency myelopoiesis, dysfunctional mature neutrophils, and HLA-DRlo monocytes. Our study provides detailed insights into the systemic immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals profound alterations in the myeloid cell compartment associated with severe COVID-19.	40	jonas_et_al_2020_10x_pbmc	Homo sapiens	99049	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Developmental cell programs are co-opted in inflammatory skin disease (Lymphoid and Mast)	Gary Reynolds, Peter Vegh, [] Muzlifah Haniffa	The skin confers biophysical and immunological protection through a complex cellular network established early in embryonic development. We profiled the transcriptomes of more than 500,000 single cells from developing human fetal skin, healthy adult skin, and adult skin with atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We leveraged these datasets to compare cell states across development, homeostasis, and disease. Our analysis revealed an enrichment of innate immune cells in skin during the first trimester and clonal expansion of disease-associated lymphocytes in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We uncovered and validated in situ a reemergence of prenatal vascular endothelial cell and macrophage cellular programs in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis lesional skin. These data illustrate the dynamism of cutaneous immunity and provide opportunities for targeting pathological developmental programs in inflammatory skin diseases.	40	Reynolds_et_al_2021_adult_lymphoid_mast	Homo sapiens	95363	1GB	RNA	Raw count
scRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and esophagus tissue stability after cold preservation (spleen)	Madissoon, E and Wilbrey-Clark, [] K and others	Background: The Human Cell Atlas is a large international collaborative effort to map all cell types of the human body. Single-cell RNA sequencing can generate high-quality data for the delivery of such an atlas. However, delays between fresh sample collection and processing may lead to poor data and difficulties in experimental design. Results: This study assesses the effect of cold storage on fresh healthy spleen, esophagus, and lung from ≥ 5 donors over 72 h. We collect 240,000 high-quality single-cell transcriptomes with detailed cell type annotations and whole genome sequences of donors, enabling future eQTL studies. Our data provide a valuable resource for the study of these 3 organs and will allow cross-organ comparison of cell types. We see little effect of cold ischemic time on cell yield, total number of reads per cell, and other quality control metrics in any of the tissues within the first 24 h. However, we observe a decrease in the proportions of lung T cells at 72 h, higher percentage of mitochondrial reads, and increased contamination by background ambient RNA reads in the 72-h samples in the spleen, which is cell type specific. Conclusions: In conclusion, we present robust protocols for tissue preservation for up to 24 h prior to scRNA-seq analysis. This greatly facilitates the logistics of sample collection for Human Cell Atlas or clinical studies since it increases the time frames for sample processing.	40	madissoon2020_spleen	Homo sapiens	94257	525MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Lung cancer)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	40	Qian_et_al_2020_LC	Homo sapiens	93575	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Transcriptional Programming of Normal and Inflamed Human Epidermis at Single-Cell Resolution	Cheng, Jeffrey B and Sedgewick, [] Ruby and others	Perturbations in the transcriptional programs specifying epidermal differentiation cause diverse skin pathologies ranging from impaired barrier function to inflammatory skin disease. However, the global scope and organization of this complex cellular program remain undefined. Here we report single-cell RNA sequencing profiles of 92,889 human epidermal cells from 9 normal and 3 inflamed skin samples. Transcriptomics-derived keratinocyte subpopulations reflect classic epidermal strata but also sharply compartmentalize epithelial functions such as cell-cell communication, inflammation, and WNT pathway modulation. In keratinocytes, ∼12% of assessed transcript expression varies in coordinate patterns, revealing undescribed gene expression programs governing epidermal homeostasis. We also identify molecular fingerprints of inflammatory skin states, including S100 activation in the interfollicular epidermis of normal scalp, enrichment of a CD1C+CD301A+ myeloid dendritic cell population in psoriatic epidermis, and IL1βhiCCL3hiCD14+ monocyte-derived macrophages enriched in foreskin. This compendium of RNA profiles provides a critical step toward elucidating epidermal diseases of development, differentiation, and inflammation.	40	Cheng_et_al_2018	Homo sapiens	92889	2GB	RNA	Log-normalized
Resolving the fibrotic niche of human liver cirrhosis at single-cell level (human)	P. Ramachandran, R. Dobie, [] N. C. Henderson	Currently there are no effective antifibrotic therapies for liver cirrhosis, a major killer worldwide. To obtain a cellular resolution of directly relevant pathogenesis and to inform therapeutic design, we profile the transcriptomes of over 100,000 human single cells, yielding molecular definitions for non-parenchymal cell types present in healthy and cirrhotic human liver. We uncover a novel scar-associated TREM2+CD9+ macrophage subpopulation, which expands in liver fibrosis, differentiates from circulating monocytes and is pro-fibrogenic. We also define novel ACKR1+ and PLVAP+ endothelial cells that expand in cirrhosis, are topographically scar-restricted and enhance leucocyte transmigration. Multi-lineage ligand-receptor modelling of interactions between the novel scar-associated macrophages, endothelial cells and PDGFRα+ collagen-producing mesenchymal cells reveals intra-scar activity of several pro-fibrogenic pathways including TNFRSF12A, PDGFR and NOTCH signalling. Our work dissects unanticipated aspects of the cellular and molecular basis of human organ fibrosis at a single-cell level, and provides the conceptual framework required to discover rational therapeutic targets in liver cirrhosis.	40	GSE136103_human	Homo sapiens	92645	2GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Endothelial cell)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_endothelial	Homo sapiens	89291	511MB	RNA	Raw count
scRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and esophagus tissue stability after cold preservation (esophagus)	Madissoon, E and Wilbrey-Clark, [] K and others	Background: The Human Cell Atlas is a large international collaborative effort to map all cell types of the human body. Single-cell RNA sequencing can generate high-quality data for the delivery of such an atlas. However, delays between fresh sample collection and processing may lead to poor data and difficulties in experimental design. Results: This study assesses the effect of cold storage on fresh healthy spleen, esophagus, and lung from ≥ 5 donors over 72 h. We collect 240,000 high-quality single-cell transcriptomes with detailed cell type annotations and whole genome sequences of donors, enabling future eQTL studies. Our data provide a valuable resource for the study of these 3 organs and will allow cross-organ comparison of cell types. We see little effect of cold ischemic time on cell yield, total number of reads per cell, and other quality control metrics in any of the tissues within the first 24 h. However, we observe a decrease in the proportions of lung T cells at 72 h, higher percentage of mitochondrial reads, and increased contamination by background ambient RNA reads in the 72-h samples in the spleen, which is cell type specific. Conclusions: In conclusion, we present robust protocols for tissue preservation for up to 24 h prior to scRNA-seq analysis. This greatly facilitates the logistics of sample collection for Human Cell Atlas or clinical studies since it increases the time frames for sample processing.	40	madissoon2020_esophagus	Homo sapiens	87947	929MB	RNA	Raw count
Cell Atlas of The Human Fovea and Peripheral Retina	Wenjun Yan, Yi-Rong Peng, [] Dejan Juric & Joshua R. Sanes	Most irreversible blindness results from retinal disease. To advance our understanding of the etiology of blinding diseases, we used single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to analyze the transcriptomes of ~85,000 cells from the fovea and peripheral retina of seven adult human donors. Utilizing computational methods, we identified 58 cell types within 6 classes: photoreceptor, horizontal, bipolar, amacrine, retinal ganglion and non-neuronal cells. Nearly all types are shared between the two retinal regions, but there are notable differences in gene expression and proportions between foveal and peripheral cohorts of shared types. We then used the human retinal atlas to map expression of 636 genes implicated as causes of or risk factors for blinding diseases. Many are expressed in striking cell class-, type-, or region-specific patterns. Finally, we compared gene expression signatures of cell types between human and the cynomolgus macaque monkey, Macaca fascicularis. We show that over 90% of human types correspond transcriptomically to those previously identified in macaque, and that expression of disease-related genes is largely conserved between the two species. These results validate the use of the macaque for modeling blinding disease, and provide a foundation for investigating molecular mechanisms underlying visual processing.	40	GSE148077	Homo sapiens	84982	4GB	RNA	Raw count
Collagen-producing lung cell atlas identifies multiple subsets with distinct localization and relevance to fibrosis (human)	Tatsuya Tsukui, Kai-Hui Sun, [] Dean Sheppard	Collagen-producing cells maintain the complex architecture of the lung and drive pathologic scarring in pulmonary fibrosis. Here we perform single-cell RNA-sequencing to identify all collagen-producing cells in normal and fibrotic lungs. We characterize multiple collagen-producing subpopulations with distinct anatomical localizations in different compartments of murine lungs. One subpopulation, characterized by expression of Cthrc1 (collagen triple helix repeat containing 1), emerges in fibrotic lungs and expresses the highest levels of collagens. Single-cell RNA-sequencing of human lungs, including those from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and scleroderma patients, demonstrate similar heterogeneity and CTHRC1-expressing fibroblasts present uniquely in fibrotic lungs. Immunostaining and in situ hybridization show that these cells are concentrated within fibroblastic foci. We purify collagen-producing subpopulations and find disease-relevant phenotypes of Cthrc1-expressing fibroblasts in in vitro and adoptive transfer experiments. Our atlas of collagen-producing cells provides a roadmap for studying the roles of these unique populations in homeostasis and pathologic fibrosis.	40	GSE132771_human	Homo sapiens	83704	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell Analysis of Crohn’s Disease Lesions Identifies a Pathogenic Cellular Module Associated with Resistance to Anti-TNF Therapy	Jerome C. Martin, Christie Chang, [] Ephraim Kenigsberg	Clinical benefits of cytokine blockade in ileal Crohn’s disease (iCD) are limited to a subset of patients. Here, we applied single-cell technologies to iCD lesions to address whether cellular heterogeneity contributes to treatment resistance. We found that a subset of patients expressed a unique cellular module in inflamed tissues that consisted of IgG plasma cells, inflammatory mononuclear phagocytes, activated T cells, and stromal cells, which we named the GIMATS module. Analysis of ligand-receptor interaction pairs identified a distinct network connectivity that likely drives the GIMATS module. Strikingly, the GIMATS module was also present in a subset of patients in four independent iCD cohorts (n = 441), and its presence at diagnosis correlated with failure to achieve durable corticosteroid-free remission upon anti-TNF therapy. These results emphasize the limitations of current diagnostic assays and the potential for single-cell mapping tools to identify novel biomarkers of treatment response and tailored therapeutic opportunities.	40	GSE134809	Homo sapiens	82133	699MB	RNA	Raw count
Bulk and single-cell gene expression profiling of SARS-CoV-2 infected human cell lines identifies molecular targets for therapeutic intervention (H1299)	Wyler E, Mösbauer K, [] Landthaler M	The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is an ongoing global health threat with more than two million infected people since its emergence in late 2019. Detailed knowledge of the molecular biology of the infection is indispensable for understanding of the viral replication, host responses, and disease progression. We provide gene expression profiles of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections in three human cell lines (H1299, Caco-2 and Calu-3 cells), using bulk and single-cell transcriptomics. Small RNA profiling showed strong expression of the immunity and inflammation-associated microRNA miRNA-155 upon infection with both viruses. SARS-CoV-2 elicited approximately two-fold higher stimulation of the interferon response compared to SARS-CoV in the permissive human epithelial cell line Calu-3, and induction of cytokines such as CXCL10 or IL6. Single cell RNA sequencing data showed that canonical interferon stimulated genes such as IFIT2 or OAS2 were broadly induced, whereas interferon beta (IFNB1) and lambda (IFNL1-4) were expressed only in a subset of infected cells. In addition, temporal resolution of transcriptional responses suggested interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) activities precede that of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB). Lastly, we identified heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) as a protein relevant for the infection. Inhibition of the HSP90 charperone activity by Tanespimycin/17-N-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) resulted in a reduction of viral replication, and of TNF and IL1B mRNA levels. In summary, our study established in vitro cell culture models to study SARS-CoV-2 infection and identified HSP90 protein as potential drug target for therapeutic intervention of SARS-CoV-2 infection.	40	GSE148729_H1299	Homo sapiens	81736	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-nucleus transcriptomics of the prefrontal cortex in major depressive disorder implicates oligodendrocyte precursor cells and excitatory neurons	Corina Nagy, Malosree Maitra, [] Gustavo Turecki	Major depressive disorder (MDD) has an enormous impact on global disease burden, affecting millions of people worldwide and ranking as a leading cause of disability for almost three decades. Past molecular studies of MDD employed bulk homogenates of postmortem brain tissue, which obscures gene expression changes within individual cell types. Here we used single-nucleus transcriptomics to examine ~80,000 nuclei from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of male individuals with MDD (n = 17) and of healthy controls (n = 17). We identified 26 cellular clusters, and over 60% of these showed differential gene expression between groups. We found that the greatest dysregulation occurred in deep layer excitatory neurons and immature oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs), and these contributed almost half (47%) of all changes in gene expression. These results highlight the importance of dissecting cell-type-specific contributions to the disease and offer opportunities to identify new avenues of research and novel targets for treatment.	40	GSE144136	Homo sapiens	78886	2GB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell atlas of the human healthy airways	Marie Deprez, Laure-Emmanuelle Zaragosi, [] Pascal Barbry	Rationale The respiratory tract constitutes an elaborated line of defense based on a unique cellular ecosystem. Single-cell profiling methods enable the investigation of cell population distributions and transcriptional changes along the airways. Methods We have explored cellular heterogeneity of the human airway epithelium in 10 healthy living volunteers by single-cell RNA profiling. 77,969 cells were collected by bronchoscopy at 35 distinct locations, from the nose to the 12th division of the airway tree. Results The resulting atlas is composed of a high percentage of epithelial cells (89.1%), but also immune (6.2%) and stromal (4.7%) cells with peculiar cellular proportions in different sites of the airways. It reveals differential gene expression between identical cell types (suprabasal, secretory, and multiciliated cells) from the nose (MUC4, PI3, SIX3) and tracheobronchial (SCGB1A1, TFF3) airways. By contrast, cell-type specific gene expression was stable across all tracheobronchial samples. Our atlas improves the description of ionocytes, pulmonary neuro-endocrine (PNEC) and brush cells, which are likely derived from a common population of precursor cells. We also report a population of KRT13 positive cells with a high percentage of dividing cells which are reminiscent of “hillock” cells previously described in mouse. Conclusions Robust characterization of this unprecedented large single-cell cohort establishes an important resource for future investigations. The precise description of the continuum existing from nasal epithelium to successive divisions of lung airways and the stable gene expression profile of these regions better defines conditions under which relevant tracheobronchial proxies of human respiratory diseases can be developed.	40	deprez2019	Homo sapiens	77969	678MB	RNA	Raw count
Multimodal mapping of the tumor and peripheral blood immune landscape in human pancreatic cancer (PBMC)	Nina G. Steele, Eileen S. Carpenter, [] Marina Pasca di Magliano	Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is characterized by an immune-suppressive tumor microenvironment that renders it largely refractory to immunotherapy. We implemented a multimodal analysis approach to elucidate the immune landscape in PDA. Using a combination of CyTOF, single-cell RNA sequencing and multiplex immunohistochemistry on patient tumors, matched blood and non-malignant samples, we uncovered a complex network of immune-suppressive cellular interactions. These experiments revealed heterogeneous expression of immune checkpoint receptors in individual patients’ T cells and increased markers of CD8+ T cell dysfunction in the advanced disease stage. Tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells had an increased proportion of cells expressing an exhausted expression profile that included upregulation of the immune checkpoint TIGIT, a finding that we validated at the protein level. Our findings point to a profound alteration of the immune landscape of tumors, and to patient-specific immune changes that should be taken into account as combination immunotherapy becomes available for pancreatic cancer.	40	GSE155698_PBMC	Homo sapiens	77671	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell Transcriptomic Analysis of Human Lung Provides Insights into the Pathobiology of Pulmonary Fibrosis (all)	Paul A. Reyfman, James M. Walter, [] Alexander V. Misharin	Rationale: The contributions of diverse cell populations in the human lung to pulmonary fibrosis pathogenesis are poorly understood. Single-cell RNA sequencing can reveal changes within individual cell populations during pulmonary fibrosis that are important for disease pathogenesis. Objectives: To determine whether single-cell RNA sequencing can reveal disease-related heterogeneity within alveolar macrophages, epithelial cells, or other cell types in lung tissue from subjects with pulmonary fibrosis compared with control subjects. Methods: We performed single-cell RNA sequencing on lung tissue obtained from eight transplant donors and eight recipients with pulmonary fibrosis and on one bronchoscopic cryobiospy sample from a patient with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. We validated these data using in situ RNA hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and bulk RNA-sequencing on flow-sorted cells from 22 additional subjects. Measurements and Main Results: We identified a distinct, novel population of profibrotic alveolar macrophages exclusively in patients with fibrosis. Within epithelial cells, the expression of genes involved in Wnt secretion and response was restricted to nonoverlapping cells. We identified rare cell populations including airway stem cells and senescent cells emerging during pulmonary fibrosis. We developed a web-based tool to explore these data. Conclusions: We generated a single-cell atlas of pulmonary fibrosis. Using this atlas, we demonstrated heterogeneity within alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells from subjects with pulmonary fibrosis. These results support the feasibility of discovery-based approaches using next-generation sequencing technologies to identify signaling pathways for targeting in the development of personalized therapies for patients with pulmonary fibrosis.	40	GSE121611	Homo sapiens	76070	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Developmental cell programs are co-opted in inflammatory skin disease (Antigen-presenting cells)	Gary Reynolds, Peter Vegh, [] Muzlifah Haniffa	The skin confers biophysical and immunological protection through a complex cellular network established early in embryonic development. We profiled the transcriptomes of more than 500,000 single cells from developing human fetal skin, healthy adult skin, and adult skin with atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We leveraged these datasets to compare cell states across development, homeostasis, and disease. Our analysis revealed an enrichment of innate immune cells in skin during the first trimester and clonal expansion of disease-associated lymphocytes in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We uncovered and validated in situ a reemergence of prenatal vascular endothelial cell and macrophage cellular programs in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis lesional skin. These data illustrate the dynamism of cutaneous immunity and provide opportunities for targeting pathological developmental programs in inflammatory skin diseases.	30	Reynolds_et_al_2021_adult_apc	Homo sapiens	74164	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Onco-fetal Reprogramming of Endothelial Cells Drives Immunosuppressive Macrophages in Hepatocellular Carcinoma (14 HCC)	Ankur Sharma, Justine Jia Wen Seow, [] Ramanuj DasGupta	We employed scRNA sequencing to extensively characterize the cellular landscape of human liver from development to disease. Analysis of ∼212,000 cells representing human fetal, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and mouse liver revealed remarkable fetal-like reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment. Specifically, the HCC ecosystem displayed features reminiscent of fetal development, including re-emergence of fetal-associated endothelial cells (PLVAP/VEGFR2) and fetal-like (FOLR2) tumor-associated macrophages. In a cross-species comparative analysis, we discovered remarkable similarity between mouse embryonic, fetal-liver, and tumor macrophages. Spatial transcriptomics further revealed a shared onco-fetal ecosystem between fetal liver and HCC. Furthermore, gene regulatory analysis, spatial transcriptomics, and in vitro functional assays implicated VEGF and NOTCH signaling in maintaining onco-fetal ecosystem. Taken together, we report a shared immunosuppressive onco-fetal ecosystem in fetal liver and HCC. Our results unravel a previously unexplored onco-fetal reprogramming of the tumor ecosystem, provide novel targets for therapeutic interventions in HCC, and open avenues for identifying similar paradigms in other cancers and disease.	30	Sharma_14HCC	Homo sapiens	73589	545MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Molecular Pathways of Colon Inflammation Induced by Cancer Immunotherapy (CD3)	Adrienne M. Luoma, Shengbao Suo, [] Kai W. Wucherpfennig	Checkpoint blockade with antibodies specific for the PD-1 and CTLA-4 inhibitory receptors can induce durable responses in a wide range of human cancers. However, the immunological mechanisms responsible for severe inflammatory side effects remain poorly understood. Here we report a comprehensive single-cell analysis of immune cell populations in colitis, a common and severe side effect of checkpoint blockade. We observed a striking accumulation of CD8 T cells with highly cytotoxic and proliferative states and no evidence of regulatory T cell depletion. T cell receptor (TCR) sequence analysis demonstrated that a substantial fraction of colitis-associated CD8 T cells originated from tissue-resident populations, explaining the frequently early onset of colitis symptoms following treatment initiation. Our analysis also identified cytokines, chemokines, and surface receptors that could serve as therapeutic targets for colitis and potentially other inflammatory side effects of checkpoint blockade.	30	GSE144469_CD3	Homo sapiens	73266	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Single cell transcriptomes from human kidneys reveal the cellular identity of renal tumors	Matthew D. Young, Thomas J. Mitchell, [] Sam Behjati	Messenger RNA encodes cellular function and phenotype. In the context of human cancer, it defines the identities of malignant cells and the diversity of tumor tissue. We studied 72,501 single-cell transcriptomes of human renal tumors and normal tissue from fetal, pediatric, and adult kidneys. We matched childhood Wilms tumor with specific fetal cell types, thus providing evidence for the hypothesis that Wilms tumor cells are aberrant fetal cells. In adult renal cell carcinoma, we identified a canonical cancer transcriptome that matched a little-known subtype of proximal convoluted tubular cell. Analyses of the tumor composition defined cancer-associated normal cells and delineated a complex vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling circuit. Our findings reveal the precise cellular identities and compositions of human kidney tumors.	30	young2018	Homo sapiens	72501	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Proliferating SPP1/MERTK-expressing macrophages in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis	Christina Morse, Tracy Tabib, [] Robert Lafyatis	A comprehensive understanding of the changes in gene expression in cell types involved in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) will shed light on the mechanisms underlying the loss of alveolar epithelial cells and development of honeycomb cysts and fibroblastic foci. We sought to understand changes in IPF lung cell transcriptomes and gain insight into innate immune aspects of pathogenesis. We investigated IPF pathogenesis using single-cell RNA-sequencing of fresh lung explants, comparing human IPF fibrotic lower lobes reflecting late disease, upper lobes reflecting early disease and normal lungs. IPF lower lobes showed increased fibroblasts, and basal, ciliated, goblet and club cells, but decreased alveolar epithelial cells, and marked alterations in inflammatory cells. We found three discrete macrophage subpopulations in normal and fibrotic lungs, one expressing monocyte markers, one highly expressing FABP4 and INHBA (FABP4hi), and one highly expressing SPP1 and MERTK (SPP1hi). SPP1hi macrophages in fibrotic lower lobes showed highly upregulated SPP1 and MERTK expression. Low-level local proliferation of SPP1hi macrophages in normal lungs was strikingly increased in IPF lungs. Co-localisation and causal modelling supported the role for these highly proliferative SPP1hi macrophages in activation of IPF myofibroblasts in lung fibrosis. These data suggest that SPP1hi macrophages contribute importantly to lung fibrosis in IPF, and that therapeutic strategies targeting MERTK and macrophage proliferation may show promise for treatment of this disease.	30	GSE128033	Homo sapiens	71771	5GB	RNA	Raw count
Comparative Analysis and Refinement of Human PSC-Derived Kidney Organoid Differentiation with Single-Cell Transcriptomics (Organoid)	Haojia Wu, Kohei Uchimura, [] Benjamin D. Humphreys	Kidney organoids derived from human pluripotent stem cells have great utility for investigating organogenesis and disease mechanisms and, potentially, as a replacement tissue source, but how closely organoids derived from current protocols replicate adult human kidney is undefined. We compared two directed differentiation protocols by single-cell transcriptomics of 83,130 cells from 65 organoids with single-cell transcriptomes of fetal and adult kidney cells. Both protocols generate a diverse range of kidney cells with differing ratios, but organoid-derived cell types are immature, and 10%-20% of cells are non-renal. Reconstructing lineage relationships by pseudotemporal ordering identified ligands, receptors, and transcription factor networks associated with fate decisions. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its cognate receptor NTRK2 were expressed in the neuronal lineage during organoid differentiation. Inhibiting this pathway improved organoid formation by reducing neurons by 90% without affecting kidney differentiation, highlighting the power of single-cell technologies to characterize and improve organoid differentiation.	40	GSE118184	Homo sapiens	71390	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Regenerative potential of prostate luminal cells revealed by single-cell analysis (human - postCNV)	Wouter R Karthaus, Matan Hofree, [] Charles L Sawyers	Androgen deprivation is the cornerstone of prostate cancer treatment. It results in involution of the normal gland to ~90% of its original size because of the loss of luminal cells. The prostate regenerates when androgen is restored, a process postulated to involve stem cells. Using single-cell RNA sequencing, we identified a rare luminal population in the mouse prostate that expresses stemlike genes (Sca1+ and Psca+) and a large population of differentiated cells (Nkx3.1+, Pbsn+). In organoids and in mice, both populations contribute equally to prostate regeneration, partly through androgen-driven expression of growth factors (Nrg2, Rspo3) by mesenchymal cells acting in a paracrine fashion on luminal cells. Analysis of human prostate tissue revealed similar differentiated and stemlike luminal subpopulations that likewise acquire enhanced regenerative potential after androgen ablation. We propose that prostate regeneration is driven by nearly all persisting luminal cells, not just by rare stem cells.	30	GSE146811_human	Homo sapiens	69855	3GB	RNA	Log-normalized
Heterogeneity and clonal relationships of adaptive immune cells in ulcerative colitis revealed by single-cell analyses	Boland, Brigid S and He, [] J Justin and others	Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) encompasses a spectrum of gastrointestinal disorders driven by dysregulated immune responses against gut microbiota. We integrated single-cell RNA and antigen receptor sequencing to elucidate key components, cellular states, and clonal relationships of the peripheral and gastrointestinal mucosal immune systems in health and ulcerative colitis (UC). UC was associated with an increase in IgG1+ plasma cells in colonic tissue, increased colonic regulatory T cells characterized by elevated expression of the transcription factor ZEB2, and an enrichment of a γδ T cell subset in the peripheral blood. Moreover, we observed heterogeneity in CD8+ tissue-resident memory T (TRM) cells in colonic tissue, with four transcriptionally distinct states of differentiation observed across health and disease. In the setting of UC, there was a marked shift of clonally related CD8+ TRM cells toward an inflammatory state, mediated, in part, by increased expression of the T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin. Together, these results provide a detailed atlas of transcriptional changes occurring in adaptive immune cells in the context of UC and suggest a role for CD8+ TRM cells in IBD.	30	GSE125527	Homo sapiens	68627	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with COVID-19	Liao M, Liu Y, [] Zhang Z	Respiratory immune characteristics associated with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) severity are currently unclear. We characterized bronchoalveolar lavage fluid immune cells from patients with varying severity of COVID-19 and from healthy people by using single-cell RNA sequencing. Proinflammatory monocyte-derived macrophages were abundant in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with severe COVID-9. Moderate cases were characterized by the presence of highly clonally expanded CD8+ T cells. This atlas of the bronchoalveolar immune microenvironment suggests potential mechanisms underlying pathogenesis and recovery in COVID-19.	30	GSE145926	Homo sapiens	66452	3GB	RNA	Raw count
Landscape and dynamics of single immune cells in hepatocellular carcinoma (10X)	Zhang Q, He Y, [] Zhang Z	The immune microenvironment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is poorly characterized. Combining two single-cell RNA sequencing technologies, we produced transcriptomes of CD45 + immune cells for HCC patients from five immune-relevant sites: tumor, adjacent liver, hepatic lymph node (LN), blood, and ascites. A cluster of LAMP3 + dendritic cells (DCs) appeared to be the mature form of conventional DCs and possessed the potential to migrate from tumors to LNs. LAMP3 + DCs also expressed diverse immune-relevant ligands and exhibited potential to regulate multiple subtypes of lymphocytes. Of the macrophages in tumors that exhibited distinct transcriptional states, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were associated with poor prognosis, and we established the inflammatory role of SLC40A1 and GPNMB in these cells. Further, myeloid and lymphoid cells in ascites were predominantly linked to tumor and blood origins, respectively. The dynamic properties of diverse CD45 + cell types revealed by this study add new dimensions to the immune landscape of HCC.	30	GSE140228_10X	Homo sapiens	66187	913MB	RNA	Raw count
A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single-cell RNA sequencing (10X)	Kyle J. Travaglini, ProfileAhmad N. Nabhan, [] Mark A. Krasnow	Although single cell RNA sequencing studies have begun providing compendia of cell expression profiles, it has proven more difficult to systematically identify and localize all molecular cell types in individual organs to create a full molecular cell atlas. Here we describe droplet- and plate-based single cell RNA sequencing applied to ∼70,000 human lung and blood cells, combined with a multi-pronged cell annotation approach, which have allowed us to define the gene expression profiles and anatomical locations of 58 cell populations in the human lung, including 41 of 45 previously known cell types or subtypes and 14 new ones. This comprehensive molecular atlas elucidates the biochemical functions of lung cell types and the cell-selective transcription factors and optimal markers for making and monitoring them; defines the cell targets of circulating hormones and predicts local signaling interactions including sources and targets of chemokines in immune cell trafficking and expression changes on lung homing; and identifies the cell types directly affected by lung disease genes. Comparison to mouse identified 17 molecular types that appear to have been gained or lost during lung evolution and others whose expression profiles have been substantially altered, revealing extensive plasticity of cell types and cell-type-specific gene expression during organ evolution including expression switches between cell types. This lung atlas provides the molecular foundation for investigating how lung cell identities, functions, and interactions are achieved in development and tissue engineering and altered in disease and evolution.	30	Travaglini2020_10X	Homo sapiens	65662	1GB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (T/NK cell)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	30	Qian_et_al_2020_T_NK	Homo sapiens	65163	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell reconstruction of the early maternal-fetal interface in humans	Roser Vento-Tormo, Mirjana Efremova, [] Sarah A. Teichmann	Single-cell reconstruction of the early maternal–fetal interface in humans	30	ventotormo2018	Homo sapiens	64734	2GB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors (MBC)	Slyper, Michal and Porter, [] Danielle and others	Single-cell genomics is essential to chart tumor ecosystems. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) profiles RNA from cells dissociated from fresh tumors, single-nucleus RNA-Seq (snRNA-Seq) is needed to profile frozen or hard-to-dissociate tumors. Each requires customization to different tissue and tumor types, posing a barrier to adoption. Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei from 40 samples across 23 specimens spanning eight tumor types of varying tissue and sample characteristics. We evaluated protocols by cell and nucleus quality, recovery rate and cellular composition. scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq from matched samples recovered the same cell types, but at different proportions. Our work provides guidance for studies in a broad range of tumors, including criteria for testing and selecting methods from the toolbox for other tumors, thus paving the way for charting tumor atlases.	30	GSE140819_MBC	Homo sapiens	63908	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Lineage-dependent gene expression programs influence the immune landscape of colorectal cancer (SMC)	Lee, Hae-Ock and Hong, [] Jae-Woong	Immunotherapy for metastatic colorectal cancer is effective only for mismatch repair-deficient tumors with high microsatellite instability that demonstrate immune infiltration, suggesting that tumor cells can determine their immune microenvironment. To understand this cross-talk, we analyzed the transcriptome of 91,103 unsorted single cells from 23 Korean and 6 Belgian patients. Cancer cells displayed transcriptional features reminiscent of normal differentiation programs, and genetic alterations that apparently fostered immunosuppressive microenvironments directed by regulatory T cells, myofibroblasts and myeloid cells. Intercellular network reconstruction supported the association between cancer cell signatures and specific stromal or immune cell populations. Our collective view of the cellular landscape and intercellular interactions in colorectal cancer provide mechanistic information for the design of efficient immuno-oncology treatment strategies.	30	GSE132465	Homo sapiens	63689	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Clonal kinetics and single-cell transcriptional profiling of CAR-T cells in patients undergoing CD19 CAR-T immunotherapy	Alyssa Sheih, Valentin Voillet, [] Cameron J. Turtle	Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy has produced remarkable anti-tumor responses in patients with B-cell malignancies. However, clonal kinetics and transcriptional programs that regulate the fate of CAR-T cells after infusion remain poorly understood. Here we perform TCRB sequencing, integration site analysis, and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to profile CD8+ CAR-T cells from infusion products (IPs) and blood of patients undergoing CD19 CAR-T immunotherapy. TCRB sequencing shows that clonal diversity of CAR-T cells is highest in the IPs and declines following infusion. We observe clones that display distinct patterns of clonal kinetics, making variable contributions to the CAR-T cell pool after infusion. Although integration site does not appear to be a key driver of clonal kinetics, scRNA-seq demonstrates that clones that expand after infusion mainly originate from infused clusters with higher expression of cytotoxicity and proliferation genes. Thus, we uncover transcriptional programs associated with CAR-T cell behavior after infusion.	30	GSE125881	Homo sapiens	62167	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Reveals the Expansion of Cytotoxic CD4+ T Lymphocytes and a Landscape of Immune Cells in Primary Sjogren's Syndrome	Hong Xiaoping, Meng Shuhui, [] Yang Min	Objective: Primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) is a systemic autoimmune disease, and its pathogenetic mechanism is far from being understood. In this study, we aimed to explore the cellular and molecular mechanisms that lead to pathogenesis of this disease. Methods: We applied single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to 57,288 peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from five patients with pSS and five healthy controls. The immune cell subsets and susceptibility genes involved in the pathogenesis of pSS were analyzed. Flow cytometry was preformed to verify the result of scRNA-seq. Results: We identified two subpopulations significantly expand in pSS patients. The one highly expressing cytotoxicity genes is named as CD4+ CTLs cytotoxic T lymphocyte, and another highly expressing T cell receptor (TCR) variable gene is named as CD4+ TRAV13-2+ T cell. Flow cytometry results showed the percentages of CD4+ CTLs, which were profiled with CD4+ and GZMB+ staining; the total T cells of 10 patients with pSS were significantly higher than those of 10 healthy controls (P= 0.008). The expression level of IL-1β in macrophages, TCL1A in B cells, as well as interferon (IFN) response genes in most cell subsets was upregulated in the patients with pSS. Susceptibility genes including HLA-DRB5, CTLA4, and AQP3 were highly expressed in patients with pSS. Conclusions: Our data revealed disease-specific immune cell subsets and provided some potential new targets of pSS. Specific expansion of CD4+ CTLs may be involved in the pathogenesis of pSS, which might give valuable insights for therapeutic interventions of pSS.	30	GSE157278	Homo sapiens	61405	961MB	RNA	Raw count
Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment (Rhapsody - Neutrophils)	Jonas Schulte-Schrepping, Nico Reusch, [] Leif Erik Sander	Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a mild to moderate respiratory tract infection, however, a subset of patients progress to severe disease and respiratory failure. The mechanism of protective immunity in mild forms and the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 associated with increased neutrophil counts and dysregulated immune responses remain unclear. In a dual-center, two-cohort study, we combined single-cell RNA-sequencing and single-cell proteomics of whole-blood and peripheral-blood mononuclear cells to determine changes in immune cell composition and activation in mild versus severe COVID-19 (242 samples from 109 individuals) over time. HLA-DRhiCD11chi inflammatory monocytes with an interferon-stimulated gene signature were elevated in mild COVID-19. Severe COVID-19 was marked by occurrence of neutrophil precursors, as evidence of emergency myelopoiesis, dysfunctional mature neutrophils, and HLA-DRlo monocytes. Our study provides detailed insights into the systemic immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals profound alterations in the myeloid cell compartment associated with severe COVID-19.	30	jonas_et_al_2020_rhapsody_neutrophil	Homo sapiens	58383	818MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics reveals expansion of cytotoxic CD4 T cells in supercentenarians	Kosuke Hashimoto, Tsukasa Kouno, [] Piero Carninci	Supercentenarians, people who have reached 110 y of age, are a great model of healthy aging. Their characteristics of delayed onset of age-related diseases and compression of morbidity imply that their immune system remains functional. Here we performed single-cell transcriptome analysis of 61,202 peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), derived from 7 supercentenarians and 5 younger controls. We identified a marked increase of cytotoxic CD4 T cells (CD4 cytotoxic T lymphocytes [CTLs]) as a signature of supercentenarians. Furthermore, single-cell T cell receptor sequencing of 2 supercentenarians revealed that CD4 CTLs had accumulated through massive clonal expansion, with the most frequent clonotypes accounting for 15 to 35% of the entire CD4 T cell population. The CD4 CTLs exhibited substantial heterogeneity in their degree of cytotoxicity as well as a nearly identical transcriptome to that of CD8 CTLs. This indicates that CD4 CTLs utilize the transcriptional program of the CD8 lineage while retaining CD4 expression. Indeed, CD4 CTLs extracted from supercentenarians produced IFN-γ and TNF-α upon ex vivo stimulation. Our study reveals that supercentenarians have unique characteristics in their circulating lymphocytes, which may represent an essential adaptation to achieve exceptional longevity by sustaining immune responses to infections and diseases.	30	SC2018	Homo sapiens	58104	563MB	RNA	Raw count
Multimodal mapping of the tumor and peripheral blood immune landscape in human pancreatic cancer	Nina G. Steele, Eileen S. Carpenter, [] Timothy L. Frankel & Marina Pasca di Magliano	Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is characterized by an immune-suppressive tumor microenvironment that renders it largely refractory to immunotherapy. We implemented a multimodal analysis approach to elucidate the immune landscape in PDA. Using a combination of CyTOF, single-cell RNA sequencing and multiplex immunohistochemistry on patient tumors, matched blood and non-malignant samples, we uncovered a complex network of immune-suppressive cellular interactions. These experiments revealed heterogeneous expression of immune checkpoint receptors in individual patients’ T cells and increased markers of CD8+ T cell dysfunction in the advanced disease stage. Tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells had an increased proportion of cells expressing an exhausted expression profile that included upregulation of the immune checkpoint TIGIT, a finding that we validated at the protein level. Our findings point to a profound alteration of the immune landscape of tumors, and to patient-specific immune changes that should be taken into account as combination immunotherapy becomes available for pancreatic cancer.	30	GSE155698	Homo sapiens	57562	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA-seq highlights intra-tumoral heterogeneity and malignant progression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma	Junya Peng, Bao-Fa Sun, [] Yupei Zhao Yun-Gui Yang and Wenming Wu	Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most common type of pancreatic cancer featured with high intra-tumoral heterogeneity and poor prognosis. To comprehensively delineate the PDAC intra-tumoral heterogeneity and the underlying mechanism for PDAC progression, we employed single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) to acquire the transcriptomic atlas of 57,530 individual pancreatic cells from primary PDAC tumors and control pancreases, and identified diverse malignant and stromal cell types, including two ductal subtypes with abnormal and malignant gene expression profiles respectively, in PDAC. We found that the heterogenous malignant subtype was composed of several subpopulations with differential proliferative and migratory potentials. Cell trajectory analysis revealed that components of multiple tumor-related pathways and transcription factors (TFs) were differentially expressed along PDAC progression. Furthermore, we found a subset of ductal cells with unique proliferative features were associated with an inactivation state in tumor-infiltrating T cells, providing novel markers for the prediction of antitumor immune response. Together, our findings provide a valuable resource for deciphering the intra-tumoral heterogeneity in PDAC and uncover a connection between tumor intrinsic transcriptional state and T cell activation, suggesting potential biomarkers for anticancer treatment such as targeted therapy and immunotherapy.	30	peng2019	Homo sapiens	57530	3GB	RNA	Raw count
scRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and esophagus tissue stability after cold preservation (lung)	Madissoon, E and Wilbrey-Clark, [] K and others	Background: The Human Cell Atlas is a large international collaborative effort to map all cell types of the human body. Single-cell RNA sequencing can generate high-quality data for the delivery of such an atlas. However, delays between fresh sample collection and processing may lead to poor data and difficulties in experimental design. Results: This study assesses the effect of cold storage on fresh healthy spleen, esophagus, and lung from ≥ 5 donors over 72 h. We collect 240,000 high-quality single-cell transcriptomes with detailed cell type annotations and whole genome sequences of donors, enabling future eQTL studies. Our data provide a valuable resource for the study of these 3 organs and will allow cross-organ comparison of cell types. We see little effect of cold ischemic time on cell yield, total number of reads per cell, and other quality control metrics in any of the tissues within the first 24 h. However, we observe a decrease in the proportions of lung T cells at 72 h, higher percentage of mitochondrial reads, and increased contamination by background ambient RNA reads in the 72-h samples in the spleen, which is cell type specific. Conclusions: In conclusion, we present robust protocols for tissue preservation for up to 24 h prior to scRNA-seq analysis. This greatly facilitates the logistics of sample collection for Human Cell Atlas or clinical studies since it increases the time frames for sample processing.	30	madissoon2020_lung	Homo sapiens	57020	536MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell analysis reveals fibroblast heterogeneity and myofibroblasts in systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease	Eleanor Valenzi, Melissa Bulik, [] Robert Lafyatis	Objectives Myofibroblasts are key effector cells in the extracellular matrix remodelling of systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease (SSc-ILD); however, the diversity of fibroblast populations present in the healthy and SSc-ILD lung is unknown and has prevented the specific study of the myofibroblast transcriptome. We sought to identify and define the transcriptomes of myofibroblasts and other mesenchymal cell populations in human healthy and SSc-ILD lungs to understand how alterations in fibroblast phenotypes lead to SSc-ILD fibrosis. Methods We performed droplet-based, single-cell RNA-sequencing with integrated canonical correlation analysis of 13 explanted lung tissue specimens (56 196 cells) from four healthy control and four patients with SSc-ILD, with findings confirmed by cellular indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing in additional samples. Results Examination of gene expression in mesenchymal cells identified two major, SPINT2hi and MFAP5hi, and one minor, WIF1hi, fibroblast populations in the healthy control lung. Combined analysis of control and SSc-ILD mesenchymal cells identified SPINT2hi, MFAP5hi, few WIF1hi fibroblasts and a new large myofibroblast population with evidence of actively proliferating myofibroblasts. We compared differential gene expression between all SSc-ILD and control mesenchymal cell populations, as well as among the fibroblast subpopulations, showing that myofibroblasts undergo the greatest phenotypic changes in SSc-ILD and strongly upregulate expression of collagens and other profibrotic genes. Conclusions Our results demonstrate previously unrecognised fibroblast heterogeneity in SSc-ILD and healthy lungs, and define multimodal transcriptome-phenotypes associated with these populations. Our data indicate that myofibroblast differentiation and proliferation are key pathological mechanisms driving fibrosis in SSc-ILD.	40	GSE128169	Homo sapiens	56517	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics of human and mouse lung cancers reveals conserved myeloid populations across individuals and species	Rapolas Zilionis, Camilla Engblom, [] Allon M. Klein	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) comprise monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophils, and have emerged as key regulators of cancer growth. These cells can diversify into a spectrum of states, which might promote or limit tumor outgrowth but remain poorly understood. Here, we used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to map TIMs in non-small-cell lung cancer patients. We uncovered 25 TIM states, most of which were reproducibly found across patients. To facilitate translational research of these populations, we also profiled TIMs in mice. In comparing TIMs across species, we identified a near-complete congruence of population structures among dendritic cells and monocytes; conserved neutrophil subsets; and species differences among macrophages. By contrast, myeloid cell population structures in patients’ blood showed limited overlap with those of TIMs. This study determines the lung TIM landscape and sets the stage for future investigations into the potential of TIMs as immunotherapy targets.	30	GSE127465_human	Homo sapiens	54773	531MB	RNA	Raw count
Intra-and inter-cellular rewiring of the human colon during ulcerative colitis (immune cells)	Christopher S. Smillie, Moshe Biton, [] Aviv Regev	Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed risk alleles for ulcerative colitis (UC). To understand their cell type specificities and pathways of action, we generate an atlas of 366,650 cells from the colon mucosa of 18 UC patients and 12 healthy individuals, revealing 51 epithelial, stromal, and immune cell subsets, including BEST4 + enterocytes, microfold-like cells, and IL13RA2 + IL11 + inflammatory fibroblasts, which we associate with resistance to anti-TNF treatment. Inflammatory fibroblasts, inflammatory monocytes, microfold-like cells, and T cells that co-express CD8 and IL-17 expand with disease, forming intercellular interaction hubs. Many UC risk genes are cell type specific and co-regulated within relatively few gene modules, suggesting convergence onto limited sets of cell types and pathways. Using this observation, we nominate and infer functions for specific risk genes across GWAS loci. Our work provides a framework for interrogating complex human diseases and mapping risk variants to cell types and pathways.	30	smillie2019.imm	Homo sapiens	54195	1GB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors (NB)	Slyper, Michal and Porter, [] Danielle and others	Single-cell genomics is essential to chart tumor ecosystems. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) profiles RNA from cells dissociated from fresh tumors, single-nucleus RNA-Seq (snRNA-Seq) is needed to profile frozen or hard-to-dissociate tumors. Each requires customization to different tissue and tumor types, posing a barrier to adoption. Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei from 40 samples across 23 specimens spanning eight tumor types of varying tissue and sample characteristics. We evaluated protocols by cell and nucleus quality, recovery rate and cellular composition. scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq from matched samples recovered the same cell types, but at different proportions. Our work provides guidance for studies in a broad range of tumors, including criteria for testing and selecting methods from the toolbox for other tumors, thus paving the way for charting tumor atlases.	30	GSE140819_NB	Homo sapiens	53854	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell multiomic analysis identifies regulatory programs in mixed-phenotype acute leukemia.	Jeffrey M. Granja, Sandy Klemm, [] William J. Greenleaf	Identifying the causes of human diseases requires deconvolution of abnormal molecular phenotypes spanning DNA accessibility, gene expression and protein abundance1,2,3. We present a single-cell framework that integrates highly multiplexed protein quantification, transcriptome profiling and analysis of chromatin accessibility. Using this approach, we establish a normal epigenetic baseline for healthy blood development, which we then use to deconvolve aberrant molecular features within blood from patients with mixed-phenotype acute leukemia4,5. Despite widespread epigenetic heterogeneity within the patient cohort, we observe common malignant signatures across patients as well as patient-specific regulatory features that are shared across phenotypic compartments of individual patients. Integrative analysis of transcriptomic and chromatin-accessibility maps identified 91,601 putative peak-to-gene linkages and transcription factors that regulate leukemia-specific genes, such as RUNX1-linked regulatory elements proximal to the marker gene CD69. These results demonstrate how integrative, multiomic analysis of single cells within the framework of normal development can reveal both distinct and shared molecular mechanisms of disease from patient samples.	30	GSE139369	Homo sapiens	53632	3GB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell map of intratumoral changes during anti-PD1 treatment of patients with breast cancer (Cohort 1 - T cell)	Ayse Bassez, Hanne Vos, [] Diether Lambrechts	Immune-checkpoint blockade (ICB) combined with neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves pathological complete response in breast cancer. To understand why only a subset of tumors respond to ICB, patients with hormone receptor-positive or triple-negative breast cancer were treated with anti-PD1 before surgery. Paired pre- versus on-treatment biopsies from treatment-naive patients receiving anti-PD1 (n = 29) or patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy before anti-PD1 (n = 11) were subjected to single-cell transcriptome, T cell receptor and proteome profiling. One-third of tumors contained PD1-expressing T cells, which clonally expanded upon anti-PD1 treatment, irrespective of tumor subtype. Expansion mainly involved CD8+ T cells with pronounced expression of cytotoxic-activity (PRF1, GZMB), immune-cell homing (CXCL13) and exhaustion markers (HAVCR2, LAG3), and CD4+ T cells characterized by expression of T-helper-1 (IFNG) and follicular-helper (BCL6, CXCR5) markers. In pre-treatment biopsies, the relative frequency of immunoregulatory dendritic cells (PD-L1+), specific macrophage phenotypes (CCR2+ or MMP9+) and cancer cells exhibiting major histocompatibility complex class I/II expression correlated positively with T cell expansion. Conversely, undifferentiated pre-effector/memory T cells (TCF7+, GZMK+) or inhibitory macrophages (CX3CR1+, C3+) were inversely correlated with T cell expansion. Collectively, our data identify various immunophenotypes and associated gene sets that are positively or negatively correlated with T cell expansion following anti-PD1 treatment. We shed light on the heterogeneity in treatment response to anti-PD1 in breast cancer.	30	ayse_et_al_2021_cohort1_t	Homo sapiens	53382	821MB	RNA	Raw count
Broad immune activation underlies shared set point signatures for vaccine responsiveness in healthy individuals and disease activity in patients with lupus	Yuri Kotliarov, Rachel Sparks, [] John S. Tsang	Responses to vaccination and to diseases vary widely across individuals, which may be partly due to baseline immune variations. Identifying such baseline predictors of immune responses and their biological basis is of broad interest, given their potential importance for cancer immunotherapy, disease outcomes, vaccination and infection responses. Here we uncover baseline blood transcriptional signatures predictive of antibody responses to both influenza and yellow fever vaccinations in healthy subjects. These same signatures evaluated at clinical quiescence are correlated with disease activity in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus with plasmablast-associated flares. CITE-seq profiling of 82 surface proteins and transcriptomes of 53,201 single cells from healthy high and low influenza vaccination responders revealed that our signatures reflect the extent of activation in a plasmacytoid dendritic cell–type I IFN–T/B lymphocyte network. Our findings raise the prospect that modulating such immune baseline states may improve vaccine responsiveness and mitigate undesirable autoimmune disease activity.	30	kotliarov2020	Homo sapiens	53201	450MB	RNA, ADT	Read count
Clonal replacement of tumor-specific T cells following PD-1 blockade (basal cell carcinoma)	Kathryn E. Yost, Ansuman T. Satpathy, [] Howard Y. Chang	Immunotherapies that block inhibitory checkpoint receptors on T cells have transformed the clinical care of patients with cancer. However, whether the T cell response to checkpoint blockade relies on reinvigoration of pre-existing tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes or on recruitment of novel T cells remains unclea. Here we performed paired single-cell RNA and T cell receptor sequencing on 79,046 cells from site-matched tumors from patients with basal or squamous cell carcinoma before and after anti-PD-1 therapy. Tracking T cell receptor clones and transcriptional phenotypes revealed coupling of tumor recognition, clonal expansion and T cell dysfunction marked by clonal expansion of CD8+CD39+ T cells, which co-expressed markers of chronic T cell activation and exhaustion. However, the expansion of T cell clones did not derive from pre-existing tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes; instead, the expanded clones consisted of novel clonotypes that had not previously been observed in the same tumor. Clonal replacement of T cells was preferentially observed in exhausted CD8+ T cells and evident in patients with basal or squamous cell carcinoma. These results demonstrate that pre-existing tumor-specific T cells may have limited reinvigoration capacity, and that the T cell response to checkpoint blockade derives from a distinct repertoire of T cell clones that may have just recently entered the tumor.	30	GSE123814_BCC	Homo sapiens	53030	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics of human T cells reveals tissue and activation signatures in health and disease	Szabo, Peter A and Levitin, [] Puspa and others	Human T cells coordinate adaptive immunity in diverse anatomic compartments through production of cytokines and effector molecules, but it is unclear how tissue site influences T cell persistence and function. Here, we use single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to define the heterogeneity of human T cells isolated from lungs, lymph nodes, bone marrow and blood, and their functional responses following stimulation. Through analysis of >50,000 resting and activated T cells, we reveal tissue T cell signatures in mucosal and lymphoid sites, and lineage-specific activation states across all sites including distinct effector states for CD8+ T cells and an interferon-response state for CD4+ T cells. Comparing scRNA-seq profiles of tumor-associated T cells to our dataset reveals predominant activated CD8+ compared to CD4+ T cell states within multiple tumor types. Our results therefore establish a high dimensional reference map of human T cell activation in health for analyzing T cells in disease.	30	GSE126030	Homo sapiens	51876	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single cell dissection of plasma cell heterogeneity in symptomatic and asymptomatic myeloma	Guy Ledergor, Assaf Weiner, [] Ido Amit	Multiple myeloma, a plasma cell malignancy, is the second most common blood cancer. Despite extensive research, disease heterogeneity is poorly characterized, hampering efforts for early diagnosis and improved treatments. Here, we apply single cell RNA sequencing to study the heterogeneity of 40 individuals along the multiple myeloma progression spectrum, including 11 healthy controls, demonstrating high interindividual variability that can be explained by expression of known multiple myeloma drivers and additional putative factors. We identify extensive subclonal structures for 10 of 29 individuals with multiple myeloma. In asymptomatic individuals with early disease and in those with minimal residual disease post-treatment, we detect rare tumor plasma cells with molecular characteristics similar to those of active myeloma, with possible implications for personalized therapies. Single cell analysis of rare circulating tumor cells allows for accurate liquid biopsy and detection of malignant plasma cells, which reflect bone marrow disease. Our work establishes single cell RNA sequencing for dissecting blood malignancies and devising detailed molecular characterization of tumor cells in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients.	30	GSE117156	Homo sapiens	51840	372MB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Eye)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_eye	Homo sapiens	51836	220MB	RNA	Raw count
Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor microenvironment (all)	Diether Lambrechts, Els Wauters, [] Bernard Thienpont	Cancer cells are embedded in the tumor microenvironment (TME), a complex ecosystem of stromal cells. Here, we present a 52,698-cell catalog of the TME transcriptome in human lung tumors at single-cell resolution, validated in independent samples where 40,250 additional cells were sequenced. By comparing with matching non-malignant lung samples, we reveal a highly complex TME that profoundly molds stromal cells. We identify 52 stromal cell subtypes, including novel subpopulations in cell types hitherto considered to be homogeneous, as well as transcription factors underlying their heterogeneity. For instance, we discover fibroblasts expressing different collagen sets, endothelial cells downregulating immune cell homing and genes coregulated with established immune checkpoint transcripts and correlating with T-cell activity. By assessing marker genes for these cell subtypes in bulk RNA-sequencing data from 1,572 patients, we illustrate how these correlate with survival, while immunohistochemistry for selected markers validates them as separate cellular entities in an independent series of lung tumors. Hence, in providing a comprehensive catalog of stromal cells types and by characterizing their phenotype and co-optive behavior, this resource provides deeper insights into lung cancer biology that will be helpful in advancing lung cancer diagnosis and therapy.	30	E-MTAB-6149_all	Homo sapiens	51775	2GB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Intestine)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_intestine	Homo sapiens	51650	350MB	RNA	Raw count
Molecular Pathways of Colon Inflammation Induced by Cancer Immunotherapy (CD45)	Adrienne M. Luoma, Shengbao Suo, [] Kai W. Wucherpfennig	Checkpoint blockade with antibodies specific for the PD-1 and CTLA-4 inhibitory receptors can induce durable responses in a wide range of human cancers. However, the immunological mechanisms responsible for severe inflammatory side effects remain poorly understood. Here we report a comprehensive single-cell analysis of immune cell populations in colitis, a common and severe side effect of checkpoint blockade. We observed a striking accumulation of CD8 T cells with highly cytotoxic and proliferative states and no evidence of regulatory T cell depletion. T cell receptor (TCR) sequence analysis demonstrated that a substantial fraction of colitis-associated CD8 T cells originated from tissue-resident populations, explaining the frequently early onset of colitis symptoms following treatment initiation. Our analysis also identified cytokines, chemokines, and surface receptors that could serve as therapeutic targets for colitis and potentially other inflammatory side effects of checkpoint blockade.	30	GSE144469_CD45	Homo sapiens	51444	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Identification of resistance pathways and therapeutic targets in relapsed multiple myeloma patients through single-cell sequencing (All)	Yael C. Cohen, Mor Zada, [] Ido Amit	Multiple myeloma (MM) is a neoplastic plasma-cell disorder characterized by clonal proliferation of malignant plasma cells. Despite extensive research, disease heterogeneity within and between treatment-resistant patients is poorly characterized. In the present study, we conduct a prospective, multicenter, single-arm clinical trial (NCT04065789), combined with longitudinal single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to study the molecular dynamics of MM resistance mechanisms. Newly diagnosed MM patients (41), who either failed to respond or experienced early relapse after a bortezomib-containing induction regimen, were enrolled to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a daratumumab, carfilzomib, lenalidomide and dexamethasone combination. The primary clinical endpoint was safety and tolerability. Secondary endpoints included overall response rate, progression-free survival and overall survival. Treatment was safe and well tolerated; deep and durable responses were achieved. In prespecified exploratory analyses, comparison of 41 primary refractory and early relapsed patients, with 11 healthy subjects and 15 newly diagnosed MM patients, revealed new MM molecular pathways of resistance, including hypoxia tolerance, protein folding and mitochondria respiration, which generalized to larger clinical cohorts (CoMMpass). We found peptidylprolyl isomerase A (PPIA), a central enzyme in the protein-folding response pathway, as a potential new target for resistant MM. CRISPR–Cas9 deletion of PPIA or inhibition of PPIA with a small molecule inhibitor (ciclosporin) significantly sensitizes MM tumor cells to proteasome inhibitors. Together, our study defines a roadmap for integrating scRNA-seq in clinical trials, identifies a signature of highly resistant MM patients and discovers PPIA as a potent therapeutic target for these tumors.	30	GSE161195_GSE117156_all	Homo sapiens	51297	534MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics combined with interstitial fluid proteomics defines cell type–specific immune regulation in atopic dermatitis	Rojahn, Thomas B and Vorstandlechner, [] Victoria and others	Background: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is the most common chronic inflammatory skin disease, but its complex pathogenesis is only insufficiently understood, resulting in still limited treatment options. Objective: We sought to characterize AD on both transcriptomic and proteomic levels in humans. Methods: We used skin suction blistering, a painless and nonscarring procedure that can simultaneously sample skin cells and interstitial fluid. We then compared results with conventional biopsies. Results: Suction blistering captured epidermal and most immune cells equally well as biopsies, except for mast cells and nonmigratory CD163+ macrophages that were only present in biopsy isolates. Using single-cell RNA sequencing, we found comparable transcriptional profiles of key inflammatory pathways between blister and biopsy AD, but suction blistering was superior in cell-specific resolution for high-abundance transcripts (KRT1/KRT10, KRT16/KRT6A, S100A8/S100A9), which showed some background signals in biopsy isolates. Compared with healthy controls, we found characteristic upregulation of AD-typical cytokines such as IL13 and IL22 in Th2 and Th22 cells, respectively, but we also discovered these mediators in proliferating T cells and natural killer T cells, that also expressed the antimicrobial cytokine IL26. Overall, not T cells, but myeloid cells were most strongly enriched in AD, and we found dendritic cell (CLEC7A, amphiregulin/AREG, EREG) and macrophage products (CCL13) among the top upregulated proteins in AD blister fluid proteomic analyses. Conclusion: These data show that by using cutting-edge technology, suction blistering offers several advantages over conventional biopsies, including better transcriptomic resolution of skin cells, combined with proteomic information from interstitial fluid, unraveling novel inflammatory players that shape the cellular and proteomic microenvironment of AD.	30	GSE153760	Homo sapiens	51023	2GB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell map of intratumoral changes during anti-PD1 treatment of patients with breast cancer (Cohort 2 - All)	Ayse Bassez, Hanne Vos, [] Diether Lambrechts	Immune-checkpoint blockade (ICB) combined with neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves pathological complete response in breast cancer. To understand why only a subset of tumors respond to ICB, patients with hormone receptor-positive or triple-negative breast cancer were treated with anti-PD1 before surgery. Paired pre- versus on-treatment biopsies from treatment-naive patients receiving anti-PD1 (n = 29) or patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy before anti-PD1 (n = 11) were subjected to single-cell transcriptome, T cell receptor and proteome profiling. One-third of tumors contained PD1-expressing T cells, which clonally expanded upon anti-PD1 treatment, irrespective of tumor subtype. Expansion mainly involved CD8+ T cells with pronounced expression of cytotoxic-activity (PRF1, GZMB), immune-cell homing (CXCL13) and exhaustion markers (HAVCR2, LAG3), and CD4+ T cells characterized by expression of T-helper-1 (IFNG) and follicular-helper (BCL6, CXCR5) markers. In pre-treatment biopsies, the relative frequency of immunoregulatory dendritic cells (PD-L1+), specific macrophage phenotypes (CCR2+ or MMP9+) and cancer cells exhibiting major histocompatibility complex class I/II expression correlated positively with T cell expansion. Conversely, undifferentiated pre-effector/memory T cells (TCF7+, GZMK+) or inhibitory macrophages (CX3CR1+, C3+) were inversely correlated with T cell expansion. Collectively, our data identify various immunophenotypes and associated gene sets that are positively or negatively correlated with T cell expansion following anti-PD1 treatment. We shed light on the heterogeneity in treatment response to anti-PD1 in breast cancer.	30	ayse_et_al_2021_cohort2_all	Homo sapiens	50693	904MB	RNA	Raw count
Neuronal vulnerability and multilineage diversity in multiple sclerosis	Lucas Schirmer, Dmitry Velmeshev, [] David H. Rowitch	Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neuroinflammatory disease with a relapsing–remitting disease course at early stages, distinct lesion characteristics in cortical grey versus subcortical white matter and neurodegeneration at chronic stages. Here we used single-nucleus RNA sequencing to assess changes in expression in multiple cell lineages in MS lesions and validated the results using multiplex in situ hybridization. We found selective vulnerability and loss of excitatory CUX2-expressing projection neurons in upper-cortical layers underlying meningeal inflammation; such MS neuron populations exhibited upregulation of stress pathway genes and long non-coding RNAs. Signatures of stressed oligodendrocytes, reactive astrocytes and activated microglia mapped most strongly to the rim of MS plaques. Notably, single-nucleus RNA sequencing identified phagocytosing microglia and/or macrophages by their ingestion and perinuclear import of myelin transcripts, confirmed by functional mouse and human culture assays. Our findings indicate lineage- and region-specific transcriptomic changes associated with selective cortical neuron damage and glial activation contributing to progression of MS lesions.	30	PRJNA544731	Homo sapiens	48919	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Bulk and single-cell gene expression profiling of SARS-CoV-2 infected human cell lines identifies molecular targets for therapeutic intervention (Calu-3)	Wyler E, Mösbauer K, [] Landthaler M	The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is an ongoing global health threat with more than two million infected people since its emergence in late 2019. Detailed knowledge of the molecular biology of the infection is indispensable for understanding of the viral replication, host responses, and disease progression. We provide gene expression profiles of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections in three human cell lines (H1299, Caco-2 and Calu-3 cells), using bulk and single-cell transcriptomics. Small RNA profiling showed strong expression of the immunity and inflammation-associated microRNA miRNA-155 upon infection with both viruses. SARS-CoV-2 elicited approximately two-fold higher stimulation of the interferon response compared to SARS-CoV in the permissive human epithelial cell line Calu-3, and induction of cytokines such as CXCL10 or IL6. Single cell RNA sequencing data showed that canonical interferon stimulated genes such as IFIT2 or OAS2 were broadly induced, whereas interferon beta (IFNB1) and lambda (IFNL1-4) were expressed only in a subset of infected cells. In addition, temporal resolution of transcriptional responses suggested interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) activities precede that of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB). Lastly, we identified heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) as a protein relevant for the infection. Inhibition of the HSP90 charperone activity by Tanespimycin/17-N-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) resulted in a reduction of viral replication, and of TNF and IL1B mRNA levels. In summary, our study established in vitro cell culture models to study SARS-CoV-2 infection and identified HSP90 protein as potential drug target for therapeutic intervention of SARS-CoV-2 infection.	30	GSE148729	Homo sapiens	48890	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics reveals regulators underlying immune cell diversity and immune subtypes associated with prognosis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma	Chen, Yu-Pei and Yin, [] Jun-Yan and others	Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an aggressive malignancy with extremely skewed ethnic and geographic distributions. Increasing evidence indicates that targeting the tumor microenvironment (TME) represents a promising therapeutic approach in NPC, highlighting an urgent need to deepen the understanding of the complex NPC TME. Here, we generated single-cell transcriptome profiles for 7581 malignant cells and 40,285 immune cells from fifteen primary NPC tumors and one normal sample. We revealed malignant signatures capturing intratumoral transcriptional heterogeneity and predicting aggressiveness of malignant cells. Diverse immune cell subtypes were identified, including novel subtypes such as CLEC9A+ dendritic cells (DCs). We further revealed transcriptional regulators underlying immune cell diversity, and cell–cell interaction analyses highlighted promising immunotherapeutic targets in NPC. Moreover, we established the immune subtype-specific signatures, and demonstrated that the signatures of macrophages, plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), CLEC9A+ DCs, natural killer (NK) cells, and plasma cells were significantly associated with improved survival outcomes in NPC. Taken together, our findings represent a unique resource providing in-depth insights into the cellular heterogeneity of NPC TME and highlight potential biomarkers for anticancer treatment and risk stratification, laying a new foundation for precision therapies in NPC.	30	GSE150430	Homo sapiens	48584	1GB	RNA	Log-normalized
Transcriptome-scale spatial gene expression in the human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex	Kristen R. Maynard, Leonardo Collado-Torres, [] Andrew E. Jaffe	We used the 10x Genomics Visium platform to define the spatial topography of gene expression in the six-layered human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. We identified extensive layer-enriched expression signatures and refined associations to previous laminar markers. We overlaid our laminar expression signatures on large-scale single nucleus RNA-sequencing data, enhancing spatial annotation of expression-driven clusters. By integrating neuropsychiatric disorder gene sets, we showed differential layer-enriched expression of genes associated with schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder, highlighting the clinical relevance of spatially defined expression. We then developed a data-driven framework to define unsupervised clusters in spatial transcriptomics data, which can be applied to other tissues or brain regions in which morphological architecture is not as well defined as cortical laminae. Last, we created a web application for the scientific community to explore these raw and summarized data to augment ongoing neuroscience and spatial transcriptomics research (http://research.libd.org/spatialLIBD).	30	spatial_libd_2021	Homo sapiens	47681	2GB	RNA, visium	Raw count
Dysfunctional CD8 T cells form a proliferative, dynamically regulated compartment within human melanoma	Hanjie Li, Anne M. van der Leun, [] Ido Amit	Tumor immune cell compositions play a major role in response to immunotherapy, but the heterogeneity and dynamics of immune infiltrates in human cancer lesions remain poorly characterized. Here, we identify conserved intratumoral CD4 and CD8 T cell behaviors in scRNA-seq data from 25 melanoma patients. We discover a large population of CD8 T cells showing continuous progression from an early effector “transitional” into a dysfunctional T cell state. CD8 T cells that express a complete cytotoxic gene set are rare, and TCR sharing data suggest their independence from the transitional and dysfunctional cell states. Notably, we demonstrate that dysfunctional T cells are the major intratumoral proliferating immune cell compartment and that the intensity of the dysfunctional signature is associated with tumor reactivity. Our data demonstrate that CD8 T cells previously defined as exhausted are in fact a highly proliferating, clonal, and dynamically differentiating cell population within the human tumor microenvironment.	30	GSE123139	Homo sapiens	47397	463MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell map of diverse immune phenotypes in the breast tumor microenvironment	Elham Azizi, Ambrose J. Carr, [] Dana Pe’er	Knowledge of immune cell phenotypes in the tumor microenvironment is essential for understanding mechanisms of cancer progression and immunotherapy response. We profiled 45,000 immune cells from eight breast carcinomas, as well as matched normal breast tissue, blood, and lymph nodes, using single-cell RNA-seq. We developed a preprocessing pipeline, SEQC, and a Bayesian clustering and normalization method, Biscuit, to address computational challenges inherent to single-cell data. Despite significant similarity between normal and tumor tissue-resident immune cells, we observed continuous phenotypic expansions specific to the tumor microenvironment. Analysis of paired single-cell RNA and T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing data from 27,000 additional T cells revealed the combinatorial impact of TCR utilization on phenotypic diversity. Our results support a model of continuous activation in T cells and do not comport with the macrophage polarization model in cancer. Our results have important implications for characterizing tumor-infiltrating immune cells.	30	GSE114725	Homo sapiens	47016	309MB	RNA	Raw count
Biallelic loss of BCMA as a resistance mechanism to CAR T cell therapy in a patient with multiple myeloma	Samur, Mehmet Kemal and Fulciniti, [] Fabio and others	BCMA targeting chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy has shown deep and durable responses in multiple myeloma. However, relapse following therapy is frequently observed, and mechanisms of resistance remain ill-defined. Here, we perform single cell genomic characterization of longitudinal samples from a patient who relapsed after initial CAR T cell treatment with lack of response to retreatment. We report selection, following initial CAR T cell infusion, of a clone with biallelic loss of BCMA acquired by deletion of one allele and a mutation that creates an early stop codon on the second allele. This loss leads to lack of CAR T cell proliferation following the second infusion and is reflected by lack of soluble BCMA in patient serum. Our analysis suggests the need for careful detection of BCMA gene alterations in multiple myeloma cells from relapse following CAR T cell therapy.	30	GSE164551	Homo sapiens	46908	499MB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Pancreas)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_pancreas	Homo sapiens	45653	362MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptome analysis of human skin identifies novel fibroblast subpopulation and enrichment of immune subsets in atopic dermatitis	Helen He, Hemant Suryawanshi, [] Emma Guttman-Yassky	Background Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a prevalent inflammatory skin disease with a complex pathogenesis involving immune cell and epidermal abnormalities. Despite whole tissue biopsy studies that have advanced the mechanistic understanding of AD, single cell–based molecular alterations are largely unknown. Objective Our aims were to construct a detailed, high-resolution atlas of cell populations and assess variability in cell composition and cell-specific gene expression in the skin of patients with AD versus in controls. Methods We performed single-cell RNA sequencing on skin biopsy specimens from 5 patients with AD (4 lesional samples and 5 nonlesional samples) and 7 healthy control subjects, using 10× Genomics. Results We created transcriptomic profiles for 39,042 AD (lesional and nonlesional) and healthy skin cells. Fibroblasts demonstrated a novel COL6A5+COL18A1+ subpopulation that was unique to lesional AD and expressed CCL2 and CCL19 cytokines. A corresponding LAMP3+ dendritic cell (DC) population that expressed the CCL19 receptor CCR7 was also unique to AD lesions, illustrating a potential role for fibroblast signaling to immune cells. The lesional AD samples were characterized by expansion of inflammatory DCs (CD1A+FCER1A+) and tissue-resident memory T cells (CD69+CD103+). The frequencies of type 2 (IL13+)/type 22 (IL22+) T cells were higher than those of type 1 (IFNG+) in lesional AD, whereas this ratio was slightly diminished in nonlesional AD and further diminished in controls. Conclusion AD lesions were characterized by expanded type 2/type 22 T cells and inflammatory DCs, and by a unique inflammatory fibroblast that may interact with immune cells to regulate lymphoid cell organization and type 2 inflammation.	30	GSE147424	Homo sapiens	45324	626MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single cell genomic characterization reveals the cellular reprogramming of the gastric tumor microenvironment	Anuja Sathe, Susan M. Grimes, [] and Hanlee P. Ji	Purpose The tumor microenvironment (TME) consists of a heterogenous cellular milieu that can influence cancer cell behavior. Its characteristics have an impact on treatments such as immunotherapy. These features can be revealed with single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). We hypothesized that scRNA-seq analysis of gastric cancer (GC) together with paired normal tissue and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) would identify critical elements of cellular deregulation not apparent with other approaches. Experimental Design scRNA-seq was conducted on seven patients with GC and one patient with intestinal metaplasia. We sequenced 56,167 cells comprising GC (32,407 cells), paired normal tissue (18,657 cells) and PBMCs (5,103 cells). Protein expression was validated by multiplex immunofluorescence. Results Tumor epithelium had copy number alterations, a distinct gene expression program from normal, with intra-tumor heterogeneity. GC TME was significantly enriched for stromal cells, macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs) and Tregs. TME-exclusive stromal cells expressed distinct extracellular matrix components than normal. Macrophages were transcriptionally heterogenous and did not conform to a binary M1/M2 paradigm. Tumor-DCs had a unique gene expression program compared to PBMC DCs. TME-specific cytotoxic T cells were exhausted with two heterogenous subsets. Helper, cytotoxic T, Treg and NK cells expressed multiple immune checkpoint or costimulatory molecules. Receptor-ligand analysis revealed TME-exclusive inter-cellular communication. Conclusions Single-cell gene expression studies revealed widespread reprogramming across multiple cellular elements in the GC TME. Cellular remodeling was delineated by changes in cell numbers, transcriptional states and inter-cellular interactions. This characterization facilitates understanding of tumor biology and enables identification of novel targets including for immunotherapy.	30	Sathe_et_al_2020	Homo sapiens	45286	561MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Ovarian cancer)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	30	Qian_et_al_2020_OvC	Homo sapiens	45114	770MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Colorectal cancer)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	30	Qian_et_al_2020_CRC	Homo sapiens	44684	802MB	RNA	Raw count
Developmental cell programs are co-opted in inflammatory skin disease (Fetal)	Gary Reynolds, Peter Vegh, [] Muzlifah Haniffa	The skin confers biophysical and immunological protection through a complex cellular network established early in embryonic development. We profiled the transcriptomes of more than 500,000 single cells from developing human fetal skin, healthy adult skin, and adult skin with atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We leveraged these datasets to compare cell states across development, homeostasis, and disease. Our analysis revealed an enrichment of innate immune cells in skin during the first trimester and clonal expansion of disease-associated lymphocytes in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. We uncovered and validated in situ a reemergence of prenatal vascular endothelial cell and macrophage cellular programs in atopic dermatitis and psoriasis lesional skin. These data illustrate the dynamism of cutaneous immunity and provide opportunities for targeting pathological developmental programs in inflammatory skin diseases.	30	Reynolds_et_al_2021_fetal	Homo sapiens	44298	1GB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Breast cancer)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	30	Qian_et_al_2020_BC	Homo sapiens	44024	877MB	RNA	Raw count
Cell Types of the Human Retina and Its Organoids at Single-Cell Resolution (Developed organoid)	Cowan, Cameron S and Renner, [] Tamas and others	Human organoids recapitulating the cell-type diversity and function of their target organ are valuable for basic and translational research. We developed light-sensitive human retinal organoids with multiple nuclear and synaptic layers and functional synapses. We sequenced the RNA of 285,441 single cells from these organoids at seven developmental time points and from the periphery, fovea, pigment epithelium and choroid of light-responsive adult human retinas, and performed histochemistry. Cell types in organoids matured in vitro to a stable ‘‘developed’’ state at a rate similar to human retina development in vivo. Transcriptomes of organoid cell types converged toward the transcriptomes of adult peripheral retinal cell types. Expression of disease-associated genes was cell-type-specific in adult retina, and cell-type specificity was retained in organoids. We implicate unexpected cell types in diseases such as macular degeneration. This resource identifies cellular targets for studying disease mechanisms in organoids and for targeted repair in human retinas.	30	Cowan_et_al_2020_DO	Homo sapiens	43857	1GB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-Cell Analyses Inform Mechanisms of Myeloid-Targeted Therapies in Colon Cancer (10X)	Zhang, Lei, [] Aeryon	Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a powerful tool for defining cellular diversity in tumors, but its application toward dissecting mechanisms underlying immune-modulating therapies is scarce. We performed scRNA-seq analyses on immune and stromal populations from colorectal cancer patients, identifying specific macrophage and conventional dendritic cell (cDC) subsets as key mediators of cellular cross-talk in the tumor microenvironment. Defining comparable myeloid populations in mouse tumors enabled characterization of their response to myeloid-targeted immunotherapy. Treatment with anti-CSF1R preferentially depleted macrophages with an inflammatory signature but spared macrophage populations that in mouse and human expresses pro-angiogenic/tumorigenic genes. Treatment with a CD40 agonist antibody preferentially activated a cDC population and increased Bhlhe40+ Th1-like cells and CD8+ memory T cells. Our comprehensive analysis of key myeloid subsets in human and mouse identifies critical cellular interactions regulating tumor immunity and defines mechanisms underlying myeloid-targeted immunotherapies currently undergoing clinical testing.	30	GSE146771_10x	Homo sapiens	43817	1GB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-cell transcriptomics identifies an effectorness gradient shaping the response of CD4+ T cells to cytokines	Cano-Gamez, Eddie and Soskic, [] Christopher GC and others	Naïve CD4+ T cells coordinate the immune response by acquiring an effector phenotype in response to cytokines. However, the cytokine responses in memory T cells remain largely understudied. Here we use quantitative proteomics, bulk RNA-seq, and single-cell RNA-seq of over 40,000 human naïve and memory CD4+ T cells to show that responses to cytokines differ substantially between these cell types. Memory T cells are unable to differentiate into the Th2 phenotype, and acquire a Th17-like phenotype in response to iTreg polarization. Single-cell analyses show that T cells constitute a transcriptional continuum that progresses from naïve to central and effector memory T cells, forming an effectorness gradient accompanied by an increase in the expression of chemokines and cytokines. Finally, we show that T cell activation and cytokine responses are influenced by the effectorness gradient. Our results illustrate the heterogeneity of T cell responses, furthering our understanding of inflammation.	30	AN1801	Homo sapiens	43112	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Distinct microbial and immune niches of the human colon	Kylie R. James, Tomas Gomes, [] Sarah A. Teichmann	Gastrointestinal microbiota and immune cells interact closely and display regional specificity; however, little is known about how these communities differ with location. Here, we simultaneously assess microbiota and single immune cells across the healthy, adult human colon, with paired characterization of immune cells in the mesenteric lymph nodes, to delineate colonic immune niches at steady state. We describe distinct helper T cell activation and migration profiles along the colon and characterize the transcriptional adaptation trajectory of regulatory T cells between lymphoid tissue and colon. Finally, we show increasing B cell accumulation, clonal expansion and mutational frequency from the cecum to the sigmoid colon and link this to the increasing number of reactive bacterial species.	30	james2020	Homo sapiens	41650	746MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-cell sequencing reveals clonal expansions of pro-inflammatory synovial CD8 T cells expressing tissue-homing receptors in psoriatic arthritis	Frank Penkava, Martin Del Castillo Velasco-Herrera, [] Sam Behjati & M. Hussein Al-Mossawi	Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a debilitating immune-mediated inflammatory arthritis of unknown pathogenesis commonly affecting patients with skin psoriasis. Here we use complementary single-cell approaches to study leukocytes from PsA joints. Mass cytometry demonstrates a 3-fold expansion of memory CD8 T cells in the joints of PsA patients compared to peripheral blood. Meanwhile, droplet-based and plate-based single-cell RNA sequencing of paired T cell receptor alpha and beta chain sequences show pronounced CD8 T cell clonal expansions within the joints. Transcriptome analyses find these expanded synovial CD8 T cells to express cycling, activation, tissue-homing and tissue residency markers. T cell receptor sequence comparison between patients identifies clonal convergence. Finally, chemokine receptor CXCR3 is upregulated in the expanded synovial CD8 T cells, while two CXCR3 ligands, CXCL9 and CXCL10, are elevated in PsA synovial fluid. Our data thus provide a quantitative molecular insight into the cellular immune landscape of psoriatic arthritis.	30	E_MTAB_9492	Homo sapiens	41453	364MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell sequencing of the human midbrain reveals glial activation and a neuronal state specific to Parkinson’s disease (Non-corrected batch effects)	S. Smajic, C. A. Prada-Medina, [] M. Spielmann	Parkinson’s disease (PD) etiology is associated with genetic and environmental factors that lead to a loss of dopaminergic neurons. However, the functional interpretation of PD-associated risk variants and how other midbrain cells contribute to this neurodegenerative process are poorly understood. Here, we profiled >41,000 single-nuclei transcriptomes of postmortem midbrain tissue from 6 idiopathic PD (IPD) patients and 5 matched controls. We show that PD-risk variants are associated with glia- and neuron-specific gene expression patterns. Furthermore, Microglia and astrocytes presented IPD-specific cell proliferation and dysregulation of genes related to unfolded protein response and cytokine signalling. IPD-microglia revealed a specific pro-inflammatory trajectory. Finally, we discovered a neuronal cell cluster exclusively present in IPD midbrains characterized by CADPS2 overexpression and a high proportion of cycling cells. We conclude that elevated CADPS2 expression is specific to dysfunctional dopaminergic neurons, which have lost their dopaminergic identity and unsuccessful attempt to re-enter the cell cycle.	30	GSE157783_non_rm_batcheffect	Homo sapiens	41435	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell sequencing of the human midbrain reveals glial activation and a neuronal state specific to Parkinson’s disease (Harmony)	S. Smajic, C. A. Prada-Medina, [] M. Spielmann	Parkinson’s disease (PD) etiology is associated with genetic and environmental factors that lead to a loss of dopaminergic neurons. However, the functional interpretation of PD-associated risk variants and how other midbrain cells contribute to this neurodegenerative process are poorly understood. Here, we profiled >41,000 single-nuclei transcriptomes of postmortem midbrain tissue from 6 idiopathic PD (IPD) patients and 5 matched controls. We show that PD-risk variants are associated with glia- and neuron-specific gene expression patterns. Furthermore, Microglia and astrocytes presented IPD-specific cell proliferation and dysregulation of genes related to unfolded protein response and cytokine signalling. IPD-microglia revealed a specific pro-inflammatory trajectory. Finally, we discovered a neuronal cell cluster exclusively present in IPD midbrains characterized by CADPS2 overexpression and a high proportion of cycling cells. We conclude that elevated CADPS2 expression is specific to dysfunctional dopaminergic neurons, which have lost their dopaminergic identity and unsuccessful attempt to re-enter the cell cycle.	30	GSE157783_harmony	Homo sapiens	41435	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell RNA-Seq Reveals AML Hierarchies Relevant to Disease Progression and Immunity	Peter van Galen, Volker Hovestadt, [] Bradley E. Bernstein	Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease that resides within a complex microenvironment, complicating efforts to understand how different cell types contribute to disease progression. We combined single-cell RNA sequencing and genotyping to profile 38,410 cells from 40 bone marrow aspirates, including 16 AML patients and five healthy donors. We then applied a machine learning classifier to distinguish a spectrum of malignant cell types whose abundances varied between patients and between subclones in the same tumor. Cell type compositions correlated with prototypic genetic lesions, including an association of FLT3-ITD with abundant progenitor-like cells. Primitive AML cells exhibited dysregulated transcriptional programs with co-expression of stemness and myeloid priming genes and had prognostic significance. Differentiated monocyte-like AML cells expressed diverse immunomodulatory genes and suppressed T cell activity in vitro. In conclusion, we provide single-cell technologies and an atlas of AML cell states, regulators, and markers with implications for precision medicine and immune therapies.	30	GSE116256	Homo sapiens	41090	541MB	RNA	Raw count
Identification of resistance pathways and therapeutic targets in relapsed multiple myeloma patients through single-cell sequencing (Untreated and Pre-treatment - Figure 1)	Yael C. Cohen, Mor Zada, [] Ido Amit	Multiple myeloma (MM) is a neoplastic plasma-cell disorder characterized by clonal proliferation of malignant plasma cells. Despite extensive research, disease heterogeneity within and between treatment-resistant patients is poorly characterized. In the present study, we conduct a prospective, multicenter, single-arm clinical trial (NCT04065789), combined with longitudinal single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to study the molecular dynamics of MM resistance mechanisms. Newly diagnosed MM patients (41), who either failed to respond or experienced early relapse after a bortezomib-containing induction regimen, were enrolled to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a daratumumab, carfilzomib, lenalidomide and dexamethasone combination. The primary clinical endpoint was safety and tolerability. Secondary endpoints included overall response rate, progression-free survival and overall survival. Treatment was safe and well tolerated; deep and durable responses were achieved. In prespecified exploratory analyses, comparison of 41 primary refractory and early relapsed patients, with 11 healthy subjects and 15 newly diagnosed MM patients, revealed new MM molecular pathways of resistance, including hypoxia tolerance, protein folding and mitochondria respiration, which generalized to larger clinical cohorts (CoMMpass). We found peptidylprolyl isomerase A (PPIA), a central enzyme in the protein-folding response pathway, as a potential new target for resistant MM. CRISPR–Cas9 deletion of PPIA or inhibition of PPIA with a small molecule inhibitor (ciclosporin) significantly sensitizes MM tumor cells to proteasome inhibitors. Together, our study defines a roadmap for integrating scRNA-seq in clinical trials, identifies a signature of highly resistant MM patients and discovers PPIA as a potent therapeutic target for these tumors.	30	GSE161195_GSE117156_un_pre_treat	Homo sapiens	40612	395MB	RNA	Raw count
Regenerative lineages and immune-mediated pruning in lung cancer metastasis (human)	Ashley M. Laughney, Jing Hu, [] Joan Massagué	Developmental processes underlying normal tissue regeneration have been implicated in cancer, but the degree of their enactment during tumor progression and under the selective pressures of immune surveillance, remain unknown. Here we show that human primary lung adenocarcinomas are characterized by the emergence of regenerative cell types, typically seen in response to lung injury, and by striking infidelity among transcription factors specifying most alveolar and bronchial epithelial lineages. In contrast, metastases are enriched for key endoderm and lung-specifying transcription factors, SOX2 and SOX9, and recapitulate more primitive transcriptional programs spanning stem-like to regenerative pulmonary epithelial progenitor states. This developmental continuum mirrors the progressive stages of spontaneous outbreak from metastatic dormancy in a mouse model and exhibits SOX9-dependent resistance to natural killer cells. Loss of developmental stage-specific constraint in macrometastases triggered by natural killer cell depletion suggests a dynamic interplay between developmental plasticity and immune-mediated pruning during metastasis.	30	GSE123904_human	Homo sapiens	40505	783MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell multi-omic integration compares and contrasts features of brain cell identity (GSE126836_SN)	Joshua D. Welch, Velina Kozareva, [] Evan Z. Macosko	Defining cell types requires integrating diverse single-cell measurements from multiple experiments and biological contexts. To flexibly model single-cell datasets, we developed LIGER, an algorithm that delineates shared and dataset-specific features of cell identity. We applied it to four diverse and challenging analyses of human and mouse brain cells. First, we defined region-specific and sexually dimorphic gene expression in the mouse bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Second, we analyzed expression in the human substantia nigra, comparing cell states in specific donors and relating cell types to those in the mouse. Third, we integrated in situ and single-cell expression data to spatially locate fine subtypes of cells present in the mouse frontal cortex. Finally, we jointly defined mouse cortical cell types using single-cell RNA-seq and DNA methylation profiles, revealing putative mechanisms of cell-type-specific epigenomic regulation. Integrative analyses using LIGER promise to accelerate investigations of cell-type definition, gene regulation, and disease states.	30	GSE126836_SN	Homo sapiens	40453	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Spatiotemporal immune zonation of the human kidney (mature)	Stewart, Benjamin J and Ferdinand, [] Felipe A Vieira and others	Tissue-resident immune cells are important for organ homeostasis and defense. The epithelium may contribute to these functions directly or by cross-talk with immune cells. We used single-cell RNA sequencing to resolve the spatiotemporal immune topology of the human kidney. We reveal anatomically defined expression patterns of immune genes within the epithelial compartment, with antimicrobial peptide transcripts evident in pelvic epithelium in the mature, but not fetal, kidney. A network of tissue-resident myeloid and lymphoid immune cells was evident in both fetal and mature kidney, with postnatal acquisition of transcriptional programs that promote infection-defense capabilities. Epithelial-immune cross-talk orchestrated localization of antibacterial macrophages and neutrophils to the regions of the kidney most susceptible to infection. Overall, our study provides a global overview of how the immune landscape of the human kidney is zonated to counter the dominant immunological challenge.	30	stewart2019_mature	Homo sapiens	40268	573MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Dissecting the Single-Cell Transcriptome Network Underlying Gastric Premalignant Lesions and Early Gastric Cancer	Zhang, Peng and Yang, [] Shao	Intestinal-type gastric cancer is preceded by premalignant lesions, including chronic atrophic gastritis and intestinal metaplasia. In this study, we constructed a single-cell atlas for 32,332 high-quality cells from gastric antral mucosa biopsies of patients spanning a cascade of gastric premalignant lesions and early gastric cancer (EGC) using single-cell RNA sequencing. We then constructed a single-cell network underlying cellular and molecular characteristics of gastric epithelial cells across different lesions. We found that gland mucous cells tended to acquire an intestinal-like stem cell phenotype during metaplasia, and we identified OR51E1 as a marker for unique endocrine cells in the early-malignant lesion. We also found that HES6 might mark the pre-goblet cell cluster, potentially aiding identification of metaplasia at the early stage. Finally, we identified a panel of EGC-specific signatures, with clinical implications for the precise diagnosis of EGC. Our study offers unparalleled insights into the human gastric cellulome in premalignant and early-malignant lesions.	30	GSE134520	Homo sapiens	39450	629MB	RNA	Raw count
Mucosal Profiling of Pediatric-Onset Colitis and IBD Reveals Common Pathogenics and Therapeutic Pathways	Bing Huang, Zhanghua Chen, [] Yuxia Zhang	Pediatric-onset colitis and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have significant effects on the growth of infants and children, but the etiopathogenesis underlying disease subtypes remains incompletely understood. Here, we report single-cell clustering, immune phenotyping, and risk gene analysis for children with undifferentiated colitis, Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis. We demonstrate disease-specific characteristics, as well as common pathogenesis marked by impaired cyclic AMP (cAMP)-response signaling. Specifically, infiltration of PDE4B- and TNF-expressing macrophages, decreased abundance of CD39-expressing intraepithelial T cells, and platelet aggregation and release of 5-hydroxytryptamine at the colonic mucosae were common in colitis and IBD patients. Targeting these pathways by using the phosphodiesterase inhibitor dipyridamole restored immune homeostasis and improved colitis symptoms in a pilot study. In summary, comprehensive analysis of the colonic mucosae has uncovered common pathogenesis and therapeutic targets for children with colitis and IBD.	30	GSE121380	Homo sapiens	36419	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Dissecting the cellular specificity of smoking effects and reconstructing lineages in the human airway epithelium (in vivo)	Goldfarbmuren, Katherine C and Jackson, [] Preston E and others	Cigarette smoke first interacts with the lung through the cellularly diverse airway epithelium and goes on to drive development of most chronic lung diseases. Here, through single cell RNA-sequencing analysis of the tracheal epithelium from smokers and non-smokers, we generate a comprehensive atlas of epithelial cell types and states, connect these into lineages, and define cell-specific responses to smoking. Our analysis infers multi-state lineages that develop into surface mucus secretory and ciliated cells and then contrasts these to the unique specification of submucosal gland (SMG) cells. Accompanying knockout studies reveal that tuft-like cells are the likely progenitor of both pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and CFTR-rich ionocytes. Our smoking analysis finds that all cell types, including protected stem and SMG populations, are affected by smoking through both pan-epithelial smoking response networks and hundreds of cell-specific response genes, redefining the penetrance and cellular specificity of smoking effects on the human airway epithelium.	30	GSE134174_invivo	Homo sapiens	36248	3GB	RNA	Raw count
An Atlas of Immune Cell Exhaustion in HIV-Infected Individuals Revealed by Single-Cell Transcriptomics	Wang, Shaobo and Zhang, [] Tariq M	Chronic infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can cause progressive loss of immune cell function, or exhaustion, which impairs control of virus replication. However, little is known about the development and maintenance, as well as heterogeneity of immune cell exhaustion. Here, we investigated the effects of HIV infection on immune cell exhaustion at the transcriptomic level by analyzing single-cell RNA sequencing of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from four healthy subjects (37,847 cells) and six HIV-infected donors (28,610 cells). We identified nine immune cell clusters and eight T cell subclusters according to their unique gene expression programs; three of these (exhausted CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and interferon-responsive CD8+ T cells) were detected only in samples from HIV-infected donors. An inhibitory receptor KLRG1 was identified in the exhausted T cell populations and further characterized in HIV infected individuals. We identified a HIV-1 specific exhausted CD8+ T cell population expressing KLRG1, TIGIT, and T-betdimEomeshi markers. Ex-vivo antibody blockade of KLRG1 restored the function of HIV-specific exhausted CD8+ T cells demonstrating the contribution of KLRG1+ population to T cell exhaustion and providing an immunotherapy target to treat HIV chronic infection. Analysis of gene signatures also revealed impairment of B cell and NK cell function in HIV-infected donors. These data provide a comprehensive analysis of gene signatures associated with immune cell exhaustion during HIV infection, which could be useful in understanding exhaustion mechanisms and developing new cure therapies.	30	GSE157829	Homo sapiens	35750	1021MB	RNA	Raw count
Persistence of mature dendritic cells, TH2A, and Tc2 cells characterize clinically resolved atopic dermatitis under IL-4R alpha blockade	Christine Bangert, Katharina Rindler, [] Patrick M. Brunner	Therapeutic options for autoimmune diseases typically consist of broad and targeted immunosuppressive agents. However, sustained clinical benefit is rarely achieved, as the disease phenotype usually returns after cessation of treatment. To better understand tissue-resident immune memory in human disease, we investigated patients with atopic dermatitis (AD) who underwent short-term or long-term treatment with the IL-4R alpha blocker dupilumab. Using multi-omics profiling with single-cell RNA sequencing and multiplex proteomics, we found significant decreases in overall skin immune cell counts and normalization of transcriptomic dysregulation in keratinocytes consistent with clearance of disease. However, we identified specific immune cell populations that persisted for up to a year after clinical remission while being absent from healthy controls. These populations included LAMP3+ CCL22+ mature dendritic cells, CRTH2+ CD161+ T helper (“TH2A”) cells, and CRTAM+ cytotoxic T cells, which expressed high levels of CCL17 (dendritic cells) and IL13 (T cells). TH2A cells showed a characteristic cytokine receptor constellation with IL17RB, IL1RL1 (ST2), and CRLF2 expression, suggesting that these cells are key responders to the AD-typical epidermal alarmins IL-25, IL-33, and TSLP, respectively. We thus identified disease-linked immune cell populations in resolved AD indicative of a persisting disease memory, facilitating a rapid response system of epidermal-dermal cross-talk between keratinocytes, dendritic cells, and T cells. This observation may help to explain the disease recurrence upon termination of immunosuppressive treatments in AD, and it identifies potential disease memory–linked cell types that may be targeted to achieve a more sustained therapeutic response.	30	GSE158432_GSE153760	Homo sapiens	35685	977MB	RNA	Raw count
Dissecting intratumour heterogeneity of nodal B-cell lymphomas at the transcriptional, genetic and drug-response levels	Tobias Roider, Julian Seufert, [] Sascha Dietrich	Tumour heterogeneity encompasses both the malignant cells and their microenvironment. While heterogeneity between individual patients is known to affect the efficacy of cancer therapy, most personalized treatment approaches do not account for intratumour heterogeneity. We addressed this issue by studying the heterogeneity of nodal B-cell lymphomas by single-cell RNA-sequencing and transcriptome-informed flow cytometry. We identified transcriptionally distinct malignant subpopulations and compared their drug-response and genomic profiles. Malignant subpopulations from the same patient responded strikingly differently to anti-cancer drugs ex vivo, which recapitulated subpopulation-specific drug sensitivity during in vivo treatment. Infiltrating T cells represented the majority of non-malignant cells, whose gene-expression signatures were similar across all donors, whereas the frequencies of T-cell subsets varied significantly between the donors. Our data provide insights into the heterogeneity of nodal B-cell lymphomas and highlight the relevance of intratumour heterogeneity for personalized cancer therapy.	30	roider2019	Homo sapiens	35370	609MB	RNA	Raw count
Integrative single-cell analysis of transcriptional and epigenetic states in the human adult brain (snDrop-seq)	Lake, Blue B and Chen, [] Peter V and others	Detailed characterization of the cell types in the human brain requires scalable experimental approaches to examine multiple aspects of the molecular state of individual cells, as well as computational integration of the data to produce unified cell-state annotations. Here we report improved high-throughput methods for single-nucleus droplet-based sequencing (snDrop-seq) and single-cell transposome hypersensitive site sequencing (scTHS-seq). We used each method to acquire nuclear transcriptomic and DNA accessibility maps for >60,000 single cells from human adult visual cortex, frontal cortex, and cerebellum. Integration of these data revealed regulatory elements and transcription factors that underlie cell-type distinctions, providing a basis for the study of complex processes in the brain, such as genetic programs that coordinate adult remyelination. We also mapped disease-associated risk variants to specific cellular populations, which provided insights into normal and pathogenic cellular processes in the human brain. This integrative multi-omics approach permits more detailed single-cell interrogation of complex organs and tissues.	30	GSE97930	Homo sapiens	35289	357MB	RNA	Raw count
Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment (Rhapsody - Monocytes)	Jonas Schulte-Schrepping, Nico Reusch, [] Leif Erik Sander	Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a mild to moderate respiratory tract infection, however, a subset of patients progress to severe disease and respiratory failure. The mechanism of protective immunity in mild forms and the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 associated with increased neutrophil counts and dysregulated immune responses remain unclear. In a dual-center, two-cohort study, we combined single-cell RNA-sequencing and single-cell proteomics of whole-blood and peripheral-blood mononuclear cells to determine changes in immune cell composition and activation in mild versus severe COVID-19 (242 samples from 109 individuals) over time. HLA-DRhiCD11chi inflammatory monocytes with an interferon-stimulated gene signature were elevated in mild COVID-19. Severe COVID-19 was marked by occurrence of neutrophil precursors, as evidence of emergency myelopoiesis, dysfunctional mature neutrophils, and HLA-DRlo monocytes. Our study provides detailed insights into the systemic immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals profound alterations in the myeloid cell compartment associated with severe COVID-19.	30	jonas_et_al_2020_rhapsody_monocyte	Homo sapiens	34772	653MB	RNA	Raw count
Cell Types of the Human Retina and Its Organoids at Single-Cell Resolution (Peripheral retina)	Cowan, Cameron S and Renner, [] Tamas and others	Human organoids recapitulating the cell-type diversity and function of their target organ are valuable for basic and translational research. We developed light-sensitive human retinal organoids with multiple nuclear and synaptic layers and functional synapses. We sequenced the RNA of 285,441 single cells from these organoids at seven developmental time points and from the periphery, fovea, pigment epithelium and choroid of light-responsive adult human retinas, and performed histochemistry. Cell types in organoids matured in vitro to a stable ‘‘developed’’ state at a rate similar to human retina development in vivo. Transcriptomes of organoid cell types converged toward the transcriptomes of adult peripheral retinal cell types. Expression of disease-associated genes was cell-type-specific in adult retina, and cell-type specificity was retained in organoids. We implicate unexpected cell types in diseases such as macular degeneration. This resource identifies cellular targets for studying disease mechanisms in organoids and for targeted repair in human retinas.	30	Cowan_et_al_2020_PR	Homo sapiens	34723	738MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Integrated single cell analysis of blood and cerebrospinal fluid leukocytes in multiple sclerosis	David Schafflick, Chenling A. Xu, [] Gerd Meyer zu Horste	Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protects the central nervous system (CNS) and analyzing CSF aids the diagnosis of CNS diseases, but our understanding of CSF leukocytes remains superficial. Here, using single cell transcriptomics, we identify a specific location-associated composition and transcriptome of CSF leukocytes. Multiple sclerosis (MS) – an autoimmune disease of the CNS – increases transcriptional diversity in blood, but increases cell type diversity in CSF including a higher abundance of cytotoxic phenotype T helper cells. An analytical approach, named cell set enrichment analysis (CSEA) identifies a cluster-independent increase of follicular (TFH) cells potentially driving the known expansion of B lineage cells in the CSF in MS. In mice, TFH cells accordingly promote B cell infiltration into the CNS and the severity of MS animal models. Immune mechanisms in MS are thus highly compartmentalized and indicate ongoing local T/B cell interaction.	30	GSE138266	Homo sapiens	34552	1GB	RNA	Raw count
Benchmarking single-cell RNA-sequencing protocols for cell atlas projects (human_reference)	Elisabetta Mereu, Atefeh Lafzi, [] Oliver Stegle and Holger Heyn	Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is the leading technique for characterizing the transcriptomes of individual cells in a sample. The latest protocols are scalable to thousands of cells and are being used to compile cell atlases of tissues, organs and organisms. However, the protocols differ substantially with respect to their RNA capture efficiency, bias, scale and costs, and their relative advantages for different applications are unclear. In the present study, we generated benchmark datasets to systematically evaluate protocols in terms of their power to comprehensively describe cell types and states. We performed a multicenter study comparing 13 commonly used scRNA-seq and single-nucleus RNA-seq protocols applied to a heterogeneous reference sample resource. Comparative analysis revealed marked differences in protocol performance. The protocols differed in library complexity and their ability to detect cell-type markers, impacting their predictive value and suitability for integration into reference cell atlases. These results provide guidance both for individual researchers and for consortium projects such as the Human Cell Atlas.	30	GSE133549_human_reference	Homo sapiens	34459	278MB	RNA	Raw count
Tumor and immune reprogramming during immunotherapy in advanced renal cell carcinoma	Kevin Bi, Meng Xiao He, [] Eliezer M. Van Allen.	Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) results in durable disease control in a subset of patients with advancedrenal cell carcinoma (RCC), but mechanisms driving resistance are poorly understood. We characterize thesingle-cell transcriptomes of cancer and immune cells from metastatic RCC patients before or after ICBexposure. In responders, subsets of cytotoxic T cells express higher levels of co-inhibitory receptors andeffector molecules. Macrophages from treated biopsies shift toward pro-inflammatory states in responseto an interferon-rich microenvironment but also upregulate immunosuppressive markers. In cancer cells,we identify bifurcation into two subpopulations differing in angiogenic signaling and upregulation of immu-nosuppressive programs after ICB. Expression signatures for cancer cell subpopulations and immuneevasion are associated withPBRM1mutation and survival in primary and ICB-treated advanced RCC. Ourfindings demonstrate that ICB remodels the RCC microenvironment and modifies the interplay between can-cer and immune cell populations critical for understanding response and resistance to ICB	30	SCP1288	Homo sapiens	34326	2GB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of human lung provides insights into the pathobiology of pulmonary fibrosis (epithelial cells)	Paul A. Reyfman, James M. Walter, [] Alexander V. Misharin	Rationale: The contributions of diverse cell populations in the human lung to pulmonary fibrosis pathogenesis are poorly understood. Single-cell RNA sequencing can reveal changes within individual cell populations during pulmonary fibrosis that are important for disease pathogenesis. Objectives: To determine whether single-cell RNA sequencing can reveal disease-related heterogeneity within alveolar macrophages, epithelial cells, or other cell types in lung tissue from subjects with pulmonary fibrosis compared with control subjects. Methods: We performed single-cell RNA sequencing on lung tissue obtained from eight transplant donors and eight recipients with pulmonary fibrosis and on one bronchoscopic cryobiospy sample from a patient with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. We validated these data using in situ RNA hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and bulk RNA-sequencing on flow-sorted cells from 22 additional subjects. Measurements and Main Results: We identified a distinct, novel population of profibrotic alveolar macrophages exclusively in patients with fibrosis. Within epithelial cells, the expression of genes involved in Wnt secretion and response was restricted to nonoverlapping cells. We identified rare cell populations including airway stem cells and senescent cells emerging during pulmonary fibrosis. We developed a web-based tool to explore these data. Conclusions: We generated a single-cell atlas of pulmonary fibrosis. Using this atlas, we demonstrated heterogeneity within alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells from subjects with pulmonary fibrosis. These results support the feasibility of discovery-based approaches using next-generation sequencing technologies to identify signaling pathways for targeting in the development of personalized therapies for patients with pulmonary fibrosis.	30	GSE121611_epithelial	Homo sapiens	32646	728MB	RNA	Raw count
Distinct synovial tissue macrophage subsets regulate inflammation and remission in rheumatoid arthritis	Alivernini, Stefano and MacDonald, [] Simone and others	Immune-regulatory mechanisms of drug-free remission in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are unknown. We hypothesized that synovial tissue macrophages (STM), which persist in remission, contribute to joint homeostasis. We used single-cell transcriptomics to profile 32,000 STMs and identified phenotypic changes in patients with early/active RA, treatment-refractory/active RA and RA in sustained remission. Each clinical state was characterized by different frequencies of nine discrete phenotypic clusters within four distinct STM subpopulations with diverse homeostatic, regulatory and inflammatory functions. This cellular atlas, combined with deep-phenotypic, spatial and functional analyses of synovial biopsy fluorescent activated cell sorted STMs, revealed two STM subpopulations (MerTKposTREM2high and MerTKposLYVE1pos) with unique remission transcriptomic signatures enriched in negative regulators of inflammation. These STMs were potent producers of inflammation-resolving lipid mediators and induced the repair response of synovial fibroblasts in vitro. A low proportion of MerTKpos STMs in remission was associated with increased risk of disease flare after treatment cessation. Therapeutic modulation of MerTKpos STM subpopulations could therefore be a potential treatment strategy for RA.	30	E_MTAB_8322	Homo sapiens	32139	549MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors (Ovarian)	Michal Slyper, Caroline B. M. Porter, [] Aviv Regev	Single-cell genomics is essential to chart tumor ecosystems. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) profiles RNA from cells dissociated from fresh tumors, single-nucleus RNA-Seq (snRNA-Seq) is needed to profile frozen or hard-to-dissociate tumors. Each requires customization to different tissue and tumor types, posing a barrier to adoption. Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei from 40 samples across 23 specimens spanning eight tumor types of varying tissue and sample characteristics. We evaluated protocols by cell and nucleus quality, recovery rate and cellular composition. scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq from matched samples recovered the same cell types, but at different proportions. Our work provides guidance for studies in a broad range of tumors, including criteria for testing and selecting methods from the toolbox for other tumors, thus paving the way for charting tumor atlases.	30	GSE140819_Ovarian	Homo sapiens	31914	785MB	RNA	Raw count
High systemic and tumor-associated IL-8 correlates with reduced clinical benefit of PD-L1 blockade (blood and tumor)	Kobe C. Yuen, Li-Fen Liu, [] Sanjeev Mariathasan	Although elevated plasma interleukin-8 (pIL-8) has been associated with poor outcome to immune checkpoint blockade1, this has not been comprehensively evaluated in large randomized studies. Here we analyzed circulating pIL-8 and IL8 gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumors of patients treated with atezolizumab (anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibody) from multiple randomized trials representing 1,445 patients with metastatic urothelial carcinoma (mUC) and metastatic renal cell carcinoma. High levels of IL-8 in plasma, peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumors were associated with decreased efficacy of atezolizumab in patients with mUC and metastatic renal cell carcinoma, even in tumors that were classically CD8+ T cell inflamed. Low baseline pIL-8 in patients with mUC was associated with increased response to atezolizumab and chemotherapy. Patients with mUC who experienced on-treatment decreases in pIL-8 exhibited improved overall survival when treated with atezolizumab but not with chemotherapy. Single-cell RNA sequencing of the immune compartment showed that IL8 is primarily expressed in circulating and intratumoral myeloid cells and that high IL8 expression is associated with downregulation of the antigen-presentation machinery. Therapies that can reverse the impacts of IL-8-mediated myeloid inflammation will be essential for improving outcomes of patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors.	30	GSE145281_BT	Homo sapiens	31030	381MB	RNA	Raw count
Decoding the development of the human hippocampus	Suijuan Zhong, Wenyu Ding, [] Xiaoqun Wang	The hippocampus is an important part of the limbic system in the human brain that has essential roles in spatial navigation and the consolidation of information from short-term memory to long-term memory1,2. Here we use single-cell RNA sequencing and assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC–seq) analysis to illustrate the cell types, cell linage, molecular features and transcriptional regulation of the developing human hippocampus. Using the transcriptomes of 30,416 cells from the human hippocampus at gestational weeks 16–27, we identify 47 cell subtypes and their developmental trajectories. We also identify the migrating paths and cell lineages of PAX6+ and HOPX+ hippocampal progenitors, and regional markers of CA1, CA3 and dentate gyrus neurons. Multiomic data have uncovered transcriptional regulatory networks of the dentate gyrus marker PROX1. We also illustrate spatially specific gene expression in the developing human prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. The molecular features of the human hippocampus at gestational weeks 16–20 are similar to those of the mouse at postnatal days 0–5 and reveal gene expression differences between the two species. Transient expression of the primate-specific gene NBPF1 leads to a marked increase in PROX1+ cells in the mouse hippocampus. These data provides a blueprint for understanding human hippocampal development and a tool for investigating related diseases.	30	GSE119212	Homo sapiens	30950	812MB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Muscle)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_muscle	Homo sapiens	30872	124MB	RNA	Raw count
Lipid-associated macrophages control metabolic homeostasis in a Trem2-dependent manner (human)	Diego Adhemar Jaitin, Lorenz Adlung, [] Ido Amit	Immune cells residing in white adipose tissue have been highlighted as important factors contributing to the pathogenesis of metabolic diseases, but the molecular regulators that drive adipose tissue immune cell remodeling during obesity remain largely unknown. Using index and transcriptional single-cell sorting, we comprehensively map all adipose tissue immune populations in both mice and humans during obesity. We describe a novel and conserved Trem2+ lipid-associated macrophage (LAM) subset and identify markers, spatial localization, origin, and functional pathways associated with these cells. Genetic ablation of Trem2 in mice globally inhibits the downstream molecular LAM program, leading to adipocyte hypertrophy as well as systemic hypercholesterolemia, body fat accumulation, and glucose intolerance. These findings identify Trem2 signaling as a major pathway by which macrophages respond to loss of tissue-level lipid homeostasis, highlighting Trem2 as a key sensor of metabolic pathologies across multiple tissues and a potential therapeutic target in metabolic diseases	30	GSE128518_Human	Homo sapiens	30758	507MB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Placenta)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_placenta	Homo sapiens	29876	113MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of human lung provides insights into the pathobiology of pulmonary fibrosis (macrophages)	Paul A. Reyfman, James M. Walter, [] Alexander V. Misharin	Rationale: The contributions of diverse cell populations in the human lung to pulmonary fibrosis pathogenesis are poorly understood. Single-cell RNA sequencing can reveal changes within individual cell populations during pulmonary fibrosis that are important for disease pathogenesis. Objectives: To determine whether single-cell RNA sequencing can reveal disease-related heterogeneity within alveolar macrophages, epithelial cells, or other cell types in lung tissue from subjects with pulmonary fibrosis compared with control subjects. Methods: We performed single-cell RNA sequencing on lung tissue obtained from eight transplant donors and eight recipients with pulmonary fibrosis and on one bronchoscopic cryobiospy sample from a patient with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. We validated these data using in situ RNA hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and bulk RNA-sequencing on flow-sorted cells from 22 additional subjects. Measurements and Main Results: We identified a distinct, novel population of profibrotic alveolar macrophages exclusively in patients with fibrosis. Within epithelial cells, the expression of genes involved in Wnt secretion and response was restricted to nonoverlapping cells. We identified rare cell populations including airway stem cells and senescent cells emerging during pulmonary fibrosis. We developed a web-based tool to explore these data. Conclusions: We generated a single-cell atlas of pulmonary fibrosis. Using this atlas, we demonstrated heterogeneity within alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells from subjects with pulmonary fibrosis. These results support the feasibility of discovery-based approaches using next-generation sequencing technologies to identify signaling pathways for targeting in the development of personalized therapies for patients with pulmonary fibrosis.	30	GSE121611_macrophages	Homo sapiens	29727	906MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (Renal cancer)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	30	GSE154763_KIDNEY	Homo sapiens	28930	1GB	RNA	Log-normalized
A Cellular Anatomy of the Normal Adult Human Prostate and Prostatic Urethra	Henry, Gervaise H, [] others	Using single-cell RNA sequencing, immunofluorescence, and flow cytometry, Henry et al. create a cellular anatomy of the normal human prostate and provide the tools to identify, isolate, and localize every cell type. They identify two additional epithelial cell types enriched in the prostatic urethra and proximal prostatic ducts.	100	GSE117403	Homo sapiens	28702	685MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell map of diverse immune phenotypes in the breast tumor microenvironment (BC09-11)	Elham Azizi, Ambrose J. Carr, [] Dana Pe’er	Knowledge of immune cell phenotypes in the tumor microenvironment is essential for understanding mechanisms of cancer progression and immunotherapy response. We profiled 45,000 immune cells from eight breast carcinomas, as well as matched normal breast tissue, blood, and lymph nodes, using single-cell RNA-seq. We developed a preprocessing pipeline, SEQC, and a Bayesian clustering and normalization method, Biscuit, to address computational challenges inherent to single-cell data. Despite significant similarity between normal and tumor tissue-resident immune cells, we observed continuous phenotypic expansions specific to the tumor microenvironment. Analysis of paired single-cell RNA and T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing data from 27,000 additional T cells revealed the combinatorial impact of TCR utilization on phenotypic diversity. Our results support a model of continuous activation in T cells and do not comport with the macrophage polarization model in cancer. Our results have important implications for characterizing tumor-infiltrating immune cells.	30	GSE114727	Homo sapiens	28690	571MB	RNA	Raw count
Benchmarking single-cell RNA-sequencing protocols for cell atlas projects (human_13 protocols)	Elisabetta Mereu, Atefeh Lafzi, [] Oliver Stegle and Holger Heyn	Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is the leading technique for characterizing the transcriptomes of individual cells in a sample. The latest protocols are scalable to thousands of cells and are being used to compile cell atlases of tissues, organs and organisms. However, the protocols differ substantially with respect to their RNA capture efficiency, bias, scale and costs, and their relative advantages for different applications are unclear. In the present study, we generated benchmark datasets to systematically evaluate protocols in terms of their power to comprehensively describe cell types and states. We performed a multicenter study comparing 13 commonly used scRNA-seq and single-nucleus RNA-seq protocols applied to a heterogeneous reference sample resource. Comparative analysis revealed marked differences in protocol performance. The protocols differed in library complexity and their ability to detect cell-type markers, impacting their predictive value and suitability for integration into reference cell atlases. These results provide guidance both for individual researchers and for consortium projects such as the Human Cell Atlas.	30	GSE133549_human_hamony	Homo sapiens	28457	1GB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors (NSCLC)	Slyper, Michal and Porter, [] Danielle and others	Single-cell genomics is essential to chart tumor ecosystems. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) profiles RNA from cells dissociated from fresh tumors, single-nucleus RNA-Seq (snRNA-Seq) is needed to profile frozen or hard-to-dissociate tumors. Each requires customization to different tissue and tumor types, posing a barrier to adoption. Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei from 40 samples across 23 specimens spanning eight tumor types of varying tissue and sample characteristics. We evaluated protocols by cell and nucleus quality, recovery rate and cellular composition. scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq from matched samples recovered the same cell types, but at different proportions. Our work provides guidance for studies in a broad range of tumors, including criteria for testing and selecting methods from the toolbox for other tumors, thus paving the way for charting tumor atlases.	30	GSE140819_NSCLC	Homo sapiens	28109	960MB	RNA	Raw count
Lineage-dependent gene expression programs influence the immune landscape of colorectal cancer (KUL)	Lee, Hae-Ock and Hong, [] Jae-Woong	Immunotherapy for metastatic colorectal cancer is effective only for mismatch repair-deficient tumors with high microsatellite instability that demonstrate immune infiltration, suggesting that tumor cells can determine their immune microenvironment. To understand this cross-talk, we analyzed the transcriptome of 91,103 unsorted single cells from 23 Korean and 6 Belgian patients. Cancer cells displayed transcriptional features reminiscent of normal differentiation programs, and genetic alterations that apparently fostered immunosuppressive microenvironments directed by regulatory T cells, myofibroblasts and myeloid cells. Intercellular network reconstruction supported the association between cancer cell signatures and specific stromal or immune cell populations. Our collective view of the cellular landscape and intercellular interactions in colorectal cancer provide mechanistic information for the design of efficient immuno-oncology treatment strategies.	30	GSE144735	Homo sapiens	27414	582MB	RNA	Raw count
A Targeted Multi-omic Analysis Approach Measures Protein Expression and Low-Abundance Transcripts on the Single-Cell Level (3 donors)	Florian Mair, Jami R. Erickson, [] Martin Prlic	High-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has become a frequently used tool to assess immune cell heterogeneity. Recently, the combined measurement of RNA and protein expression was developed, commonly known as cellular indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing (CITE-seq). Acquisition of protein expression data along with transcriptome data resolves some of the limitations inherent to only assessing transcripts but also nearly doubles the sequencing read depth required per single cell. Furthermore, there is still a paucity of analysis tools to visualize combined transcript-protein datasets. Here, we describe a targeted transcriptomics approach that combines an analysis of over 400 genes with simultaneous measurement of over 40 proteins on 2 <97> 104 cells in a single experiment. This targeted approach requires only about one-tenth of the read depth compared to a whole-transcriptome approach while retaining high sensitivity for low abundance transcripts. To analyze these multi-omic datasets, we adapted one-dimensional soli expression by nonlinear stochastic embedding (One-SENSE) for intuitive visualization of protein-transcript relationships on a single-cell level.	30	GSE135325_main	Homo sapiens	27241	36MB	RNA, ADT	Raw count
Spatiotemporal immune zonation of the human kidney (fetal)	Stewart, Benjamin J and Ferdinand, [] Felipe A Vieira and others	Tissue-resident immune cells are important for organ homeostasis and defense. The epithelium may contribute to these functions directly or by cross-talk with immune cells. We used single-cell RNA sequencing to resolve the spatiotemporal immune topology of the human kidney. We reveal anatomically defined expression patterns of immune genes within the epithelial compartment, with antimicrobial peptide transcripts evident in pelvic epithelium in the mature, but not fetal, kidney. A network of tissue-resident myeloid and lymphoid immune cells was evident in both fetal and mature kidney, with postnatal acquisition of transcriptional programs that promote infection-defense capabilities. Epithelial-immune cross-talk orchestrated localization of antibacterial macrophages and neutrophils to the regions of the kidney most susceptible to infection. Overall, our study provides a global overview of how the immune landscape of the human kidney is zonated to counter the dominant immunological challenge.	30	stewart2019_fetal	Homo sapiens	27203	911MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Contribution of plasma cells and B cells to hidradenitis suppurativa pathogenesis	Gudjonsson, Johann E and Tsoi, [] Christine M and others	Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a debilitating chronic inflammatory skin disease characterized by chronic abscess formation and development of multiple draining sinus tracts in the groin, axillae, and perineum. Using proteomic and transcriptomic approaches, we characterized the inflammatory responses in HS in depth, revealing immune responses centered on IFN-γ, IL-36, and TNF, with lesser contribution from IL-17A. We further identified B cells and plasma cells, with associated increases in immunoglobulin production and complement activation, as pivotal players in HS pathogenesis, with Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) and spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) pathway activation as a central signal transduction network in HS. These data provide preclinical evidence to accelerate the path toward clinical trials targeting BTK and SYK signaling in moderate-to-severe HS.	30	GSE154775	Homo sapiens	26600	866MB	RNA	Raw count
Clonal replacement of tumor-specific T cells following PD-1 blockade (squamous cell carcinoma)	Kathryn E. Yost, Ansuman T. Satpathy, [] Howard Y. Chang	Immunotherapies that block inhibitory checkpoint receptors on T cells have transformed the clinical care of patients with cancer. However, whether the T cell response to checkpoint blockade relies on reinvigoration of pre-existing tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes or on recruitment of novel T cells remains unclear. Here we performed paired single-cell RNA and T cell receptor sequencing on 79,046 cells from site-matched tumors from patients with basal or squamous cell carcinoma before and after anti-PD-1 therapy. Tracking T cell receptor clones and transcriptional phenotypes revealed coupling of tumor recognition, clonal expansion and T cell dysfunction marked by clonal expansion of CD8+CD39+ T cells, which co-expressed markers of chronic T cell activation and exhaustion. However, the expansion of T cell clones did not derive from pre-existing tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes; instead, the expanded clones consisted of novel clonotypes that had not previously been observed in the same tumor. Clonal replacement of T cells was preferentially observed in exhausted CD8+ T cells and evident in patients with basal or squamous cell carcinoma. These results demonstrate that pre-existing tumor-specific T cells may have limited reinvigoration capacity, and that the T cell response to checkpoint blockade derives from a distinct repertoire of T cell clones that may have just recently entered the tumor.	30	GSE123814_SCC	Homo sapiens	26016	527MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics identifies multiple pathways underlying antitumor function of TCR- and CD8αβ-engineered human CD4+ T cells	Jan A. Rath, Gagan Bajwa, [] Caroline Arber	Transgenic coexpression of a class I–restricted tumor antigen–specific T cell receptor (TCR) and CD8αβ (TCR8) redirects antigen specificity of CD4+ T cells. Reinforcement of biophysical properties and early TCR signaling explain how redirected CD4+ T cells recognize target cells, but the transcriptional basis for their acquired antitumor function remains elusive. We, therefore, interrogated redirected human CD4+ and CD8+ T cells by single-cell RNA sequencing and characterized them experimentally in bulk and single-cell assays and a mouse xenograft model. TCR8 expression enhanced CD8+ T cell function and preserved less differentiated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells after tumor challenge. TCR8+CD4+ T cells were most potent by activating multiple transcriptional programs associated with enhanced antitumor function. We found sustained activation of cytotoxicity, costimulation, oxidative phosphorylation– and proliferation-related genes, and simultaneously reduced differentiation and exhaustion. Our study identifies molecular features of TCR8 expression that can guide the development of enhanced immunotherapies.	30	GSE132164	Homo sapiens	25474	515MB	RNA	Raw count
Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor microenvironment (T cells)	Diether Lambrechts, Els Wauters, [] Bernard Thienpont	Cancer cells are embedded in the tumor microenvironment (TME), a complex ecosystem of stromal cells. Here, we present a 52,698-cell catalog of the TME transcriptome in human lung tumors at single-cell resolution, validated in independent samples where 40,250 additional cells were sequenced. By comparing with matching non-malignant lung samples, we reveal a highly complex TME that profoundly molds stromal cells. We identify 52 stromal cell subtypes, including novel subpopulations in cell types hitherto considered to be homogeneous, as well as transcription factors underlying their heterogeneity. For instance, we discover fibroblasts expressing different collagen sets, endothelial cells downregulating immune cell homing and genes coregulated with established immune checkpoint transcripts and correlating with T-cell activity. By assessing marker genes for these cell subtypes in bulk RNA-sequencing data from 1,572 patients, we illustrate how these correlate with survival, while immunohistochemistry for selected markers validates them as separate cellular entities in an independent series of lung tumors. Hence, in providing a comprehensive catalog of stromal cells types and by characterizing their phenotype and co-optive behavior, this resource provides deeper insights into lung cancer biology that will be helpful in advancing lung cancer diagnosis and therapy.	30	E-MTAB-6149_t	Homo sapiens	24890	454MB	RNA	Raw count
Stromal cell diversity associated with immune evasion in human triple‐negative breast cancer	Sunny Z Wu, Daniel L Roden, [] Alexander Swarbrick	The tumour stroma regulates nearly all stages of carcinogenesis. Stromal heterogeneity in human triple‐negative breast cancers (TNBCs) remains poorly understood, limiting the development of stromal‐targeted therapies. Single‐cell RNA sequencing of five TNBCs revealed two cancer‐associated fibroblast (CAF) and two perivascular‐like (PVL) subpopulations. CAFs clustered into two states: the first with features of myofibroblasts and the second characterised by high expression of growth factors and immunomodulatory molecules. PVL cells clustered into two states consistent with a differentiated and immature phenotype. We showed that these stromal states have distinct morphologies, spatial relationships and functional properties in regulating the extracellular matrix. Using cell signalling predictions, we provide evidence that stromal‐immune crosstalk acts via a diverse array of immunoregulatory molecules. Importantly, the investigation of gene signatures from inflammatory‐CAFs and differentiated‐PVL cells in independent TNBC patient cohorts revealed strong associations with cytotoxic T‐cell dysfunction and exclusion, respectively. Such insights present promising candidates to further investigate for new therapeutic strategies in the treatment of TNBCs.	30	Wu_et_al_2020	Homo sapiens	24271	910MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A human liver cell atlas reveals heterogeneity and epithelial progenitors	Nadim Aizarani, Antonio Saviano, [] Dominic Grün	The human liver is an essential multifunctional organ. The incidence of liver diseases is rising and there are limited treatment options. However, the cellular composition of the liver remains poorly understood. Here we performed single-cell RNA sequencing of about 10,000 cells from normal liver tissue from nine human donors to construct a human liver cell atlas. Our analysis identified previously unknown subtypes of endothelial cells, Kupffer cells, and hepatocytes, with transcriptome-wide zonation of some of these populations. We show that the EPCAM+ population is heterogeneous, comprising hepatocyte-biased and cholangiocyte populations as well as a TROP2int progenitor population with strong potential to form bipotent liver organoids. As a proof-of-principle, we used our atlas to unravel the phenotypic changes that occur in hepatocellular carcinoma cells and in human hepatocytes and liver endothelial cells engrafted into a mouse liver. Our human liver cell atlas provides a powerful resource to enable the discovery of previously unknown cell types in normal and diseased livers. Single-cell RNA sequencing of cells from healthy human liver, hepatocellular carcinoma and chimaeric mouse liver identifies subtypes of liver cells, epithelial progenitors and differences between healthy and diseased cells.	30	GSE124395	Homo sapiens	24174	840MB	RNA	Raw count
The single-cell transcriptomic landscape of early human diabetic nephropathy	Parker C. Wilson, Haojia Wu, [] ProfileBenjamin D. Humphreys	Diabetic nephropathy is characterized by damage to both the glomerulus and tubulointerstitium, but relatively little is known about accompanying cell-specific changes in gene expression. We performed unbiased single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) on cryopreserved human diabetic kidney samples to generate 23,980 single-nucleus transcriptomes from 3 control and 3 early diabetic nephropathy samples. All major cell types of the kidney were represented in the final dataset. Side-by-side comparison demonstrated cell-type–specific changes in gene expression that are important for ion transport, angiogenesis, and immune cell activation. In particular, we show that the diabetic thick ascending limb, late distal convoluted tubule, and principal cells all adopt a gene expression signature consistent with increased potassium secretion, including alterations in Na+/K+-ATPase, WNK1, mineralocorticoid receptor, and NEDD4L expression, as well as decreased paracellular calcium and magnesium reabsorption. We also identify strong angiogenic signatures in glomerular cell types, proximal convoluted tubule, distal convoluted tubule, and principal cells. Taken together, these results suggest that increased potassium secretion and angiogenic signaling represent early kidney responses in human diabetic nephropathy.	30	GSE131882	Homo sapiens	23991	2GB	RNA	Raw count
Immunopathogenesis of hidradenitis suppurativa and response to anti–TNF-α therapy	Margaret M. Lowe, Haley B. Naik, [] and Michael D. Rosenblum	Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a highly prevalent, morbid inflammatory skin disease with limited treatment options. The major cell types and inflammatory pathways in skin of patients with HS are poorly understood, and which patients will respond to TNF-α blockade is currently unknown. We discovered that clinically and histologically healthy appearing skin (i.e., nonlesional skin) is dysfunctional in patients with HS with a relative loss of immune regulatory pathways. HS skin lesions were characterized by quantitative and qualitative dysfunction of type 2 conventional dendritic cells, relatively reduced regulatory T cells, an influx of memory B cells, and a plasma cell/plasmablast infiltrate predominantly in end-stage fibrotic skin. At the molecular level, there was a relative bias toward the IL-1 pathway and type 1 T cell responses when compared with both healthy skin and psoriatic patient skin. Anti–TNF-α therapy markedly attenuated B cell activation with minimal effect on other inflammatory pathways. Finally, we identified an immune activation signature in skin before anti–TNF-α treatment that correlated with subsequent lack of response to this modality. Our results reveal the fundamental immunopathogenesis of HS and provide a molecular foundation for future studies focused on stratifying patients based on likelihood of clinical response to TNF-α blockade.	30	GSE155850	Homo sapiens	23723	620MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA sequencing of human kidney	Jinling Liao, Zhenyuan Yu, [] Jiwen Cheng & Zengnan Mo	A comprehensive cellular anatomy of normal human kidney is crucial to address the cellular origins of renal disease and renal cancer. Some kidney diseases may be cell type-specific, especially renal tubular cells. To investigate the classification and transcriptomic information of the human kidney, we rapidly obtained a single-cell suspension of the kidney and conducted single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). Here, we present the scRNA-seq data of 23,366 high-quality cells from the kidneys of three human donors. In this dataset, we show 10 clusters of normal human renal cells. Due to the high quality of single-cell transcriptomic information, proximal tubule (PT) cells were classified into three subtypes and collecting ducts cells into two subtypes. Collectively, our data provide a reliable reference for studies on renal cell biology and kidney disease.	30	GSE131685	Homo sapiens	23369	234MB	RNA	Raw count
Therapy-Induced Evolution of Human Lung Cancer Revealed by Single-Cell RNA Sequencing	Maynard, Ashley and McCoach, [] Alexander and others	Lung cancer, the leading cause of cancer mortality, exhibits heterogeneity that enables adaptability, limits therapeutic success, and remains incompletely understood. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of metastatic lung cancer was performed using 49 clinical biopsies obtained from 30 patients before and during targeted therapy. Over 20,000 cancer and tumor microenvironment (TME) single-cell profiles exposed a rich and dynamic tumor ecosystem. scRNA-seq of cancer cells illuminated targetable oncogenes beyond those detected clinically. Cancer cells surviving therapy as residual disease (RD) expressed an alveolar-regenerative cell signature suggesting a therapy-induced primitive cell-state transition, whereas those present at ontherapy progressive disease (PD) upregulated kynurenine, plasminogen, and gap-junction pathways. Active T-lymphocytes and decreased macrophages were present at RD and immunosuppressive cell states characterized PD. Biological features revealed by scRNA-seq were biomarkers of clinical outcomes in independent cohorts. This study highlights how therapy-induced adaptation of the multi-cellular ecosystem of metastatic cancer shapes clinical outcomes.	30	Maynard_et_al_2020	Homo sapiens	23261	1GB	RNA	Log-normalized
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Myeloid cell)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	30	Qian_et_al_2020_Myeloid	Homo sapiens	21880	595MB	RNA	Raw count
An Integrated Gene Expression Landscape Profiling Approach to Identify Lung Tumor Endothelial Cell Heterogeneity and Angiogenic Candidates (human)	Goveia, Jermaine and Rohlenova, [] Liliana and others	Heterogeneity of lung tumor endothelial cell (TEC) phenotypes across patients, species (human/mouse), and models (in vivo/in vitro) remains poorly inventoried at the single-cell level. We single-cell RNA (scRNA)-sequenced 56,771 endothelial cells from human/mouse (peri)-tumoral lung and cultured human lung TECs, and detected 17 known and 16 previously unrecognized phenotypes, including TECs putatively regulating immune surveillance. We resolved the canonical tip TECs into a known migratory tip and a putative basement-membrane remodeling breach phenotype. Tip TEC signatures correlated with patient survival, and tip/breach TECs were most sensitive to vascular endothelial growth factor blockade. Only tip TECs were congruent across species/models and shared conserved markers. Integrated analysis of the scRNAsequenced data with orthogonal multi-omics and meta-analysis data across different human tumors, validated by functional analysis, identified collagen modification as a candidate angiogenic pathway.	30	E_MTAB_6308	Homo sapiens	21252	307MB	RNA	Raw count
Development of a Chimeric Model to Study and Manipulate Human Microglia In Vivo	Jonathan Hasselmann, Morgan A. Coburn, [] Mathew Blurton-Jones	iPSC-derived microglia offer a powerful tool to study microglial homeostasis and disease-associated inflammatory responses. Yet, microglia are highly sensitive to their environment, exhibiting transcriptomic deficiencies when kept in isolation from the brain. Furthermore, species-specific genetic variations demonstrate that rodent microglia fail to fully recapitulate the human condition. To address this, we developed an approach to study human microglia within a surrogate brain environment. Transplantation of iPSC-derived hematopoietic-progenitors into the postnatal brain of humanized, immune-deficient mice results in context-dependent differentiation into microglia and other CNS macrophages, acquisition of an ex vivo human microglial gene signature, and responsiveness to both acute and chronic insults. Most notably, transplanted microglia exhibit robust transcriptional responses to Aβ-plaques that only partially overlap with that of murine microglia, revealing new, human-specific Aβ-responsive genes. We therefore have demonstrated that this chimeric model provides a powerful new system to examine the in vivo function of patient-derived and genetically modified microglia.	30	GSE133433	Homo sapiens	20823	382MB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors (Sarcoma)	Slyper, Michal and Porter, [] Danielle and others	Single-cell genomics is essential to chart tumor ecosystems. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) profiles RNA from cells dissociated from fresh tumors, single-nucleus RNA-Seq (snRNA-Seq) is needed to profile frozen or hard-to-dissociate tumors. Each requires customization to different tissue and tumor types, posing a barrier to adoption. Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei from 40 samples across 23 specimens spanning eight tumor types of varying tissue and sample characteristics. We evaluated protocols by cell and nucleus quality, recovery rate and cellular composition. scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq from matched samples recovered the same cell types, but at different proportions. Our work provides guidance for studies in a broad range of tumors, including criteria for testing and selecting methods from the toolbox for other tumors, thus paving the way for charting tumor atlases.	30	GSE140819_Sarcoma	Homo sapiens	20625	837MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Fibroblast)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	30	Qian_et_al_2020_Fib	Homo sapiens	20363	681MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the human retina identifies cell types associated with age-related macular degeneration (Microfluidics)	Menon, Madhvi and Mohammadi, [] Manolis and others	Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified genetic variants associated with age-related macular degeneration (AMD), one of the leading causes of blindness in the elderly. However, it has been challenging to identify the cell types associated with AMD given the genetic complexity of the disease. Here we perform massively parallel single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of human retinas using two independent platforms, and report the first single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the human retina. Using a multi-resolution network-based analysis, we identify all major retinal cell types, and their corresponding gene expression signatures. Heterogeneity is observed within macroglia, suggesting that human retinal glia are more diverse than previously thought. Finally, GWAS-based enrichment analysis identifies glia, vascular cells, and cone photoreceptors to be associated with the risk of AMD. These data provide a detailed analysis of the human retina, and show how scRNA-seq can provide insight into cell types involved in complex, inflammatory genetic diseases.	30	GSE137537	Homo sapiens	20091	172MB	RNA	Raw count
Cell Types of the Human Retina and Its Organoids at Single-Cell Resolution (Foveal retina)	Cowan, Cameron S and Renner, [] Tamas and others	Human organoids recapitulating the cell-type diversity and function of their target organ are valuable for basic and translational research. We developed light-sensitive human retinal organoids with multiple nuclear and synaptic layers and functional synapses. We sequenced the RNA of 285,441 single cells from these organoids at seven developmental time points and from the periphery, fovea, pigment epithelium and choroid of light-responsive adult human retinas, and performed histochemistry. Cell types in organoids matured in vitro to a stable ‘‘developed’’ state at a rate similar to human retina development in vivo. Transcriptomes of organoid cell types converged toward the transcriptomes of adult peripheral retinal cell types. Expression of disease-associated genes was cell-type-specific in adult retina, and cell-type specificity was retained in organoids. We implicate unexpected cell types in diseases such as macular degeneration. This resource identifies cellular targets for studying disease mechanisms in organoids and for targeted repair in human retinas.	20	Cowan_et_al_2020_FR	Homo sapiens	19768	662MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A single-cell atlas of the airway epithelium reveals the CFTR-rich pulmonary ionocyte (viral transduction)	Lindsey W. Plasschaert, Rapolas Žilionis, [] and Aron B. Jaffe	The functions of epithelial tissues are dictated by the types, abundance and distribution of the differentiated cells they contain. Attempts to restore tissue function after damage require knowledge of how physiological tasks are distributed among cell types, and how cell states vary between homeostasis, injury–repair and disease. In the conducting airway, a heterogeneous basal cell population gives rise to specialized luminal cells that perform mucociliary clearance1. Here we perform single-cell profiling of human bronchial epithelial cells and mouse tracheal epithelial cells to obtain a comprehensive census of cell types in the conducting airway and their behaviour in homeostasis and regeneration. Our analysis reveals cell states that represent known and novel cell populations, delineates their heterogeneity and identifies distinct differentiation trajectories during homeostasis and tissue repair. Finally, we identified a novel, rare cell type that we call the ‘pulmonary ionocyte’, which co-expresses FOXI1, multiple subunits of the vacuolar-type H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) and CFTR, the gene that is mutated in cystic fibrosis. Using immunofluorescence, modulation of signalling pathways and electrophysiology, we show that Notch signalling is necessary and FOXI1 expression is sufficient to drive the production of the pulmonary ionocyte, and that the pulmonary ionocyte is a major source of CFTR activity in the conducting airway epithelium.	20	GSE102580_human_transduced	Homo sapiens	19766	737MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-cell RNA sequencing unveils the shared and the distinct cytotoxic hallmarks of human TCRVδ1 and TCRVδ2 γδ T lymphocytes	Pizzolato, Gabriele and Kaminski, [] Anne and others	γδ T lymphocytes represent ∼1% of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and even more cells in most tissues of vertebrates. Although they have important anticancer functions, most current single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) studies do not identify γδ T lymphocytes because their transcriptomes at the single-cell level are unknown. Here we show that high-resolution clustering of large scRNA-seq datasets and a combination of gene signatures allow the specific detection of human γδ T lymphocytes and identification of their T cell receptor (TCR)Vδ1 and TCRVδ2 subsets in large datasets from complex cell mixtures. In t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding plots from blood and tumor samples, the few γδ T lymphocytes appear collectively embedded between cytotoxic CD8 T and NK cells. Their TCRVδ1 and TCRVδ2 subsets form close yet distinct subclusters, respectively neighboring NK and CD8 T cells because of expression of shared and distinct cytotoxic maturation genes. Similar pseudotime maturation trajectories of TCRVδ1 and TCRVδ2 γδ T lymphocytes were discovered, unveiling in both subsets an unattended pool of terminally differentiated effector memory cells with preserved proliferative capacity, a finding confirmed by in vitro proliferation assays. Overall, the single-cell transcriptomes of thousands of individual γδ T lymphocytes from different CMV+ and CMV- donors reflect cytotoxic maturation stages driven by the immunological history of donors. This landmark study establishes the rationale for identification, subtyping, and deep characterization of human γδ T lymphocytes in further scRNA-seq studies of complex tissues in physiological and disease conditions.	20	GSE128223	Homo sapiens	19121	298MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals compromised immune microenvironment in precursor stages of multiple myeloma	Oksana Zavidij, Nicholas J. Haradhvala, [] and Irene M. Ghobrial	Precursor states of multiple myeloma (MM) and its native tumor microenvironment need in-depth molecular characterization to better stratify and treat patients at risk. Using single-cell RNA sequencing of bone marrow cells from precursor stages, monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance and smoldering MM, to full-blown MM alongside healthy donors, we demonstrate early immune changes during patient progression. We find that natural killer cell abundance is frequently increased in the early stages and associated with altered chemokine receptor expression. As early as smoldering MM, we show loss of granzyme K+ memory cytotoxic T cells and show their critical role in MM immunosurveillance in mouse models. Finally, we report major histocompatibility complex class II dysregulation in CD14+ monocytes, which results in T-cell suppression in vitro. These results provide a comprehensive map of immune changes at play over the evolution of premalignant MM, which will help develop strategies for immune-based patient stratification.	20	GSE124310	Homo sapiens	19027	320MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell Analysis Reveals Fibroblast Clusters Linked to Immunotherapy Resistance in Cancer	Kieffer, Yann and Hocine, [] Alice and others	A subset of cancer-associated fibroblasts (FAP+/CAF-S1) mediates immunosuppression in breast cancers, but its heterogeneity and its impact on immunotherapy response remain unknown. Here, we identify 8 CAF-S1 clusters by analyzing more than 19,000 single CAF-S1 fibroblasts from breast cancer. We validate the five most abundant clusters by flow cytometry and in silico analyses in other cancer types, highlighting their relevance. Myofibroblasts from clusters 0 and 3, characterized by extracellular matrix proteins and TGFβ signaling, respectively, are indicative of primary resistance to immunotherapies. Cluster 0/ecm-myCAF upregulates PD-1 and CTLA4 protein levels in regulatory T lymphocytes (Tregs), which, in turn, increases CAF-S1 cluster 3/TGFβ-myCAF cellular content. Thus, our study highlights a positive feedback loop between specific CAF-S1 clusters and Tregs and uncovers their role in immunotherapy resistance.	20	Yann_Kiefer_et_al_2020	Homo sapiens	18296	764MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Reconstructed Single-Cell Fate Trajectories Define Lineage Plasticity Windows during Differentiation of Human PSC-Derived Distal Lung Progenitors (Time series scRNA-seq)	Killian Hurley, Jun Ding, [] Darrell N Kotton	Alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (AEC2s) are the facultative progenitors responsible for maintaining lung alveoli throughout life but are difficult to isolate from patients. Here, we engineer AEC2s from human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) in vitro and use time-series single-cell RNA sequencing with lentiviral barcoding to profile the kinetics of their differentiation in comparison to primary fetal and adult AEC2 benchmarks. We observe bifurcating cell-fate trajectories as primordial lung progenitors differentiate in vitro, with some progeny reaching their AEC2 fate target, while others diverge to alternative non-lung endodermal fates. We develop a Continuous State Hidden Markov model to identify the timing and type of signals, such as overexuberant Wnt responses, that induce some early multipotent NKX2-1+ progenitors to lose lung fate. Finally, we find that this initial developmental plasticity is regulatable and subsides over time, ultimately resulting in PSC-derived AEC2s that exhibit a stable phenotype and nearly limitless self-renewal capacity.	20	hurley_et_al_2020_timeseries	Homo sapiens	18106	508MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (B cell)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	20	Qian_et_al_2020_B	Homo sapiens	17944	398MB	RNA	Raw count
A single-nucleus RNA-sequencing pipeline to decipher the molecular anatomy and pathophysiology of human kidneys	Blue B. Lake, Song Chen, [] Sanjay Jain	Defining cellular and molecular identities within the kidney is necessary to understand its organization and function in health and disease. Here we demonstrate a reproducible method with minimal artifacts for single-nucleus Droplet-based RNA sequencing (snDrop-Seq) that we use to resolve thirty distinct cell populations in human adult kidney. We define molecular transition states along more than ten nephron segments spanning two major kidney regions. We further delineate cell type-specific expression of genes associated with chronic kidney disease, diabetes and hypertension, providing insight into possible targeted therapies. This includes expression of a hypertension-associated mechano-sensory ion channel in mesangial cells, and identification of proximal tubule cell populations defined by pathogenic expression signatures. Our fully optimized, quality-controlled transcriptomic profiling pipeline constitutes a tool for the generation of healthy and diseased molecular atlases applicable to clinical samples.	20	GSE121862	Homo sapiens	17659	375MB	RNA	Raw count
Altered human oligodendrocyte heterogeneity in multiple sclerosis	Sarah Jäkel, Eneritz Agirre, [] Gonçalo Castelo-Branco	Oligodendrocyte pathology is increasingly implicated in neurodegenerative diseases as oligodendrocytes both myelinate and provide metabolic support to axons. In multiple sclerosis (MS), demyelination in the central nervous system thus leads to neurodegeneration, but the severity of MS between patients is very variable. Disability does not correlate well with the extent of demyelination1, which suggests that other factors contribute to this variability. One such factor may be oligodendrocyte heterogeneity. Not all oligodendrocytes are the same—those from the mouse spinal cord inherently produce longer myelin sheaths than those from the cortex2, and single-cell analysis of the mouse central nervous system identified further differences3,4. However, the extent of human oligodendrocyte heterogeneity and its possible contribution to MS pathology remain unknown. Here we performed single-nucleus RNA sequencing from white matter areas of post-mortem human brain from patients with MS and from unaffected controls. We identified subclusters of oligodendroglia in control human white matter, some with similarities to mouse, and defined new markers for these cell states. Notably, some subclusters were underrepresented in MS tissue, whereas others were more prevalent. These differences in mature oligodendrocyte subclusters may indicate different functional states of oligodendrocytes in MS lesions. We found similar changes in normal-appearing white matter, showing that MS is a more diffuse disease than its focal demyelination suggests. Our findings of an altered oligodendroglial heterogeneity in MS may be important for understanding disease progression and developing therapeutic approaches.	20	GSE118257	Homo sapiens	16426	378MB	RNA	Raw count
Defining T cell states associated with response to checkpoint immunotherapy in melanoma	Moshe Sade-Feldman, Keren Yizhak, [] Nir Hacohen	Treatment of cancer has been revolutionized by immune checkpoint blockade therapies. Despite the high rate of response in advanced melanoma, the majority of patients succumb to disease. To identify factors associated with success or failure of checkpoint therapy, we profiled transcriptomes of 16,291 individual immune cells from 48 tumor samples of melanoma patients treated with checkpoint inhibitors. Two distinct states of CD8+ T cells were defined by clustering and associated with patient tumor regression or progression. A single transcription factor, TCF7, was visualized within CD8+ T cells in fixed tumor samples and predicted positive clinical outcome in an independent cohort of checkpoint-treated patients. We delineated the epigenetic landscape and clonality of these T cell states and demonstrated enhanced antitumor immunity by targeting novel combinations of factors in exhausted cells. Our study of immune cell transcriptomes from tumors demonstrates a strategy for identifying predictors, mechanisms, and targets for enhancing checkpoint immunotherapy.	20	GSE120575	Homo sapiens	16291	484MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single cell RNA sequencing of human microglia uncovers a subset associated with Alzheimer's disease (Discovery dataset)	Marta Olah, Vilas Menon, [] Philip L. De Jager	The extent of microglial heterogeneity in humans remains a central yet poorly explored question in light of the development of therapies targeting this cell type. Here, we investigate the population structure of live microglia purified from human cerebral cortex samples obtained at autopsy and during neurosurgical procedures. Using single cell RNA sequencing, we find that some subsets are enriched for disease-related genes and RNA signatures. We confirm the presence of four of these microglial subpopulations histologically and illustrate the utility of our data by characterizing further microglial cluster 7, enriched for genes depleted in the cortex of individuals with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Histologically, these cluster 7 microglia are reduced in frequency in AD tissue, and we validate this observation in an independent set of single nucleus data. Thus, our live human microglia identify a range of subtypes, and we prioritize one of these as being altered in AD.	20	olah_et_al_2020	Homo sapiens	16242	198MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomes of the human skin reveal age-related loss of fibroblast priming	Llorenç Solé-Boldo, Günter Raddatz, [] Frank Lyko	Fibroblasts are an essential cell population for human skin architecture and function. While fibroblast heterogeneity is well established, this phenomenon has not been analyzed systematically yet. We have used single-cell RNA sequencing to analyze the transcriptomes of more than 5,000 fibroblasts from a sun-protected area in healthy human donors. Our results define four main subpopulations that can be spatially localized and show differential secretory, mesenchymal and pro-inflammatory functional annotations. Importantly, we found that this fibroblast ‘priming’ becomes reduced with age. We also show that aging causes a substantial reduction in the predicted interactions between dermal fibroblasts and other skin cells, including undifferentiated keratinocytes at the dermal-epidermal junction. Our work thus provides evidence for a functional specialization of human dermal fibroblasts and identifies the partial loss of cellular identity as an important age-related change in the human dermis. These findings have important implications for understanding human skin aging and its associated phenotypes.	20	GSE130973	Homo sapiens	16062	316MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell Transcriptomics of Parkinson's Disease Human In Vitro Models Reveals Dopamine Neuron-Specific Stress Responses	Hugo J R Fernandes, Nikolaos Patikas, [] Emmanouil Metzakopian	The advent of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons has revolutionized Parkinson’s disease (PD) research, but single-cell transcriptomic analysis suggests unresolved cellular heterogeneity within these models. Here, we perform the largest single-cell transcriptomic study of human iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons to elucidate gene expression dynamics in response to cytotoxic and genetic stressors. We identify multiple neuronal subtypes with transcriptionally distinct profiles and differential sensitivity to stress, highlighting cellular heterogeneity in dopamine in vitro models. We validate this disease model by showing robust expression of PD GWAS genes and overlap with postmortem adult substantia nigra neurons. Importantly, stress signatures are ameliorated using felodipine, an FDA-approved drug. Using isogenic SNCA-A53T mutants, we find perturbations in glycolysis, cholesterol metabolism, synaptic signaling, and ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation. Overall, our study reveals cell type-specific perturbations in human dopamine neurons, which will further our understanding of PD and have implications for cell replacement therapies.	20	E-MTAB-9154	Homo sapiens	15411	865MB	RNA	Raw count
Massively parallel single-nucleus RNA-seq with DroNc-seq	Naomi Habib, Inbal Avraham-Davidi, [] Aviv Regev	Single-nucleus RNA sequencing (sNuc-seq) profiles RNA from tissues that are preserved or cannot be dissociated, but it does not provide high throughput. Here, we develop DroNc-seq: massively parallel sNuc-seq with droplet technology. We profile 39,111 nuclei from mouse and human archived brain samples to demonstrate sensitive, efficient, and unbiased classification of cell types, paving the way for systematic charting of cell atlases.	20	habib2017_2	Homo sapiens	14963	294MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptome conservation in a comparative analysis of fresh and cryopreserved human skin tissue: pilot in localized scleroderma	Emily Mirizio, Tracy Tabib, [] Kathryn S. Torok	Background The purpose of this study was to assess variability in cell composition and cell-specific gene expression in the skin of patients with localized scleroderma (LS) utilizing CryoStor® CS10 in comparison to RPMI to produce adequate preservation of tissue samples and cell types of interest for use in large-scale multi-institutional collaborations studying localized scleroderma and other skin disorders. Methods We performed single-cell RNA sequencing on paired skin biopsy specimens from 3 patients with LS. Each patient with one sample cryopreserved in CryoStor® CS10 and one fresh in RPMI media using 10× Genomics sequencing. Results Levels of cell viability and yield were comparable between CryoStor® CS10 (frozen) and RPMI (fresh) preserved cells. Furthermore, gene expression between preservation methods was collectively significantly correlated and conserved across all 18 identified cell cluster populations. Conclusion Comparable cell population and transcript expression yields between CryoStor® CS10 and RPMI preserved cells support the utilization of cryopreserved skin tissue in single-cell analysis. This suggests that employing standardized cryopreservation protocols for the skin tissue will help facilitate multi-site collaborations looking to identify mechanisms of disease in disorders characterized by cutaneous pathology.	20	GSE160536	Homo sapiens	14901	268MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptome analysis reveals differential nutrient absorption functions in human intestine	Yalong Wang, Wanlu Song, [] Ye-Guang Chen	The intestine plays an important role in nutrient digestion and absorption, microbe defense, and hormone secretion. Although major cell types have been identified in the mouse intestinal epithelium, cell type–specific markers and functional assignments are largely unavailable for human intestine. Here, our single-cell RNA-seq analyses of 14,537 epithelial cells from human ileum, colon, and rectum reveal different nutrient absorption preferences in the small and large intestine, suggest the existence of Paneth-like cells in the large intestine, and identify potential new marker genes for human transient-amplifying cells and goblet cells. We have validated some of these insights by quantitative PCR, immunofluorescence, and functional analyses. Furthermore, we show both common and differential features of the cellular landscapes between the human and mouse ilea. Therefore, our data provide the basis for detailed characterization of human intestine cell constitution and functions, which would be helpful for a better understanding of human intestine disorders, such as inflammatory bowel disease and intestinal tumorigenesis.	20	GSE125970	Homo sapiens	14537	636MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptome analysis of tumor and stromal compartments of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma primary tumors and metastatic lesions	Lin, Wei and Noel, [] Margaux and others	Solid tumors such as pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) comprise not just tumor cells but also a microenvironment with which the tumor cells constantly interact. Detailed characterization of the cellular composition of the tumor microenvironment is critical to the understanding of the disease and treatment of the patient. Single-cell transcriptomics has been used to study the cellular composition of different solid tumor types including PDAC. However, almost all of those studies used primary tumor tissues.	20	GSE154778	Homo sapiens	14481	416MB	RNA	Raw count
High systemic and tumor-associated IL-8 correlates with reduced clinical benefit of PD-L1 blockade (responder and nonresponder)	Kobe C. Yuen, Li-Fen Liu, [] Sanjeev Mariathasan	Although elevated plasma interleukin-8 (pIL-8) has been associated with poor outcome to immune checkpoint blockade1, this has not been comprehensively evaluated in large randomized studies. Here we analyzed circulating pIL-8 and IL8 gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumors of patients treated with atezolizumab (anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibody) from multiple randomized trials representing 1,445 patients with metastatic urothelial carcinoma (mUC) and metastatic renal cell carcinoma. High levels of IL-8 in plasma, peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumors were associated with decreased efficacy of atezolizumab in patients with mUC and metastatic renal cell carcinoma, even in tumors that were classically CD8+ T cell inflamed. Low baseline pIL-8 in patients with mUC was associated with increased response to atezolizumab and chemotherapy. Patients with mUC who experienced on-treatment decreases in pIL-8 exhibited improved overall survival when treated with atezolizumab but not with chemotherapy. Single-cell RNA sequencing of the immune compartment showed that IL8 is primarily expressed in circulating and intratumoral myeloid cells and that high IL8 expression is associated with downregulation of the antigen-presentation machinery. Therapies that can reverse the impacts of IL-8-mediated myeloid inflammation will be essential for improving outcomes of patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors.	20	GSE145281_RN	Homo sapiens	14474	223MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Spontaneously Resolved Atopic Dermatitis Shows Melanocyte and Immune Cell Activation Distinct From Healthy Control Skin (Spontaneously healed atopic dermatitis versus active atopic dermatitis)	Rindler K, Krausgruber T, [] Brunner PM	Atopic dermatitis (AD) typically starts in infancy or early childhood, showing spontaneous remission in a subset of patients, while others develop lifelong disease. Despite an increased understanding of AD, factors guiding its natural course are only insufficiently elucidated. We thus performed suction blistering in skin of adult patients with stable, spontaneous remission from previous moderate-to-severe AD during childhood. Samples were compared to healthy controls without personal or familial history of atopy, and to chronic, active AD lesions. Skin cells and tissue fluid obtained were used for single-cell RNA sequencing and proteomic multiplex assays, respectively. We found overall cell composition and proteomic profiles of spontaneously healed AD to be comparable to healthy control skin, without upregulation of typical AD activity markers (e.g., IL13, S100As, and KRT16). Among all cell types in spontaneously healed AD, melanocytes harbored the largest numbers of differentially expressed genes in comparison to healthy controls, with upregulation of potentially anti-inflammatory markers such as PLA2G7. Conventional T-cells also showed increases in regulatory markers, and a general skewing toward a more Th1-like phenotype. By contrast, gene expression of regulatory T-cells and keratinocytes was essentially indistinguishable from healthy skin. Melanocytes and conventional T-cells might thus contribute a specific regulatory milieu in spontaneously healed AD skin.	20	GSE162054_SHAD_AD	Homo sapiens	14443	340MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics of the human retinal pigment epithelium and choroid in health and macular degeneration (endothelial cell enrichment)	Andrew P. Voigt, Kelly Mulfaul, [] and Robert F. Mullins	The human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and choroid are complex tissues that provide crucial support to the retina. Disease affecting either of these supportive tissues can lead to irreversible blindness in the setting of age-related macular degeneration. In this study, single-cell RNA sequencing was performed on macular and peripheral regions of RPE-choroid from 7 human donor eyes in 2 independent experiments. In the first experiment, total RPE/choroid preparations were evaluated and expression profiles specific to RPE and major choroidal cell populations were identified. As choroidal endothelial cells represent a minority of the total RPE/choroidal cell population but are strongly implicated in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) pathogenesis, a second single-cell RNA-sequencing experiment was performed using endothelial cells enriched by magnetic separation. In this second study, we identified gene expression signatures along the choroidal vascular tree, classifying the transcriptome of human choriocapillaris, arterial, and venous endothelial cells. We found that the choriocapillaris highly and specifically expresses the regulator of cell cycle gene (RGCC), a gene that responds to complement activation and induces apoptosis in endothelial cells. In addition, RGCC was the most up-regulated choriocapillaris gene in a donor diagnosed with AMD. These results provide a characterization of the human RPE and choriocapillaris transcriptome, offering potential insight into the mechanisms of choriocapillaris response to complement injury and choroidal vascular disease in age-related macular degeneration.	20	GSE135922_EC	Homo sapiens	14234	610MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A single-cell atlas of entorhinal cortex from individuals with Alzheimer’s disease reveals cell-type-specific gene expression regulation	Alexandra Grubman, Gabriel Chew, [] Jose M. Polo	There is currently little information available about how individual cell types contribute to Alzheimer’s disease. Here we applied single-nucleus RNA sequencing to entorhinal cortex samples from control and Alzheimer’s disease brains (n = 6 per group), yielding a total of 13,214 high-quality nuclei. We detail cell-type-specific gene expression patterns, unveiling how transcriptional changes in specific cell subpopulations are associated with Alzheimer’s disease. We report that the Alzheimer’s disease risk gene APOE is specifically repressed in Alzheimer’s disease oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and astrocyte subpopulations and upregulated in an Alzheimer’s disease-specific microglial subopulation. Integrating transcription factor regulatory modules with Alzheimer’s disease risk loci revealed drivers of cell-type-specific state transitions towards Alzheimer’s disease. For example, transcription factor EB, a master regulator of lysosomal function, regulates multiple disease genes in a specific Alzheimer’s disease astrocyte subpopulation. These results provide insights into the coordinated control of Alzheimer’s disease risk genes and their cell-type-specific contribution to disease susceptibility. These results are available at http://adsn.ddnetbio.com.	20	GSE138852	Homo sapiens	13214	139MB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Spleen)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_spleen	Homo sapiens	13180	53MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of tissue-resident memory T cells in human lung cancer (10X)	James Clarke, Bharat Panwar, [] and Pandurangan Vijayan	High numbers of tissue-resident memory T (TRM) cells are associated with better clinical outcomes in cancer patients. However, the molecular characteristics that drive their efficient immune response to tumors are poorly understood. Here, single-cell and bulk transcriptomic analysis of TRM and non-TRM cells present in tumor and normal lung tissue from patients with lung cancer revealed that PD-1–expressing TRM cells in tumors were clonally expanded and enriched for transcripts linked to cell proliferation and cytotoxicity when compared with PD-1–expressing non-TRM cells. This feature was more prominent in the TRM cell subset coexpressing PD-1 and TIM-3, and it was validated by functional assays ex vivo and also reflected in their chromatin accessibility profile. This PD-1+TIM-3+ TRM cell subset was enriched in responders to PD-1 inhibitors and in tumors with a greater magnitude of CTL responses. These data highlight that not all CTLs expressing PD-1 are dysfunctional; on the contrary, TRM cells with PD-1 expression were enriched for features suggestive of superior functionality.	20	GSE111896	Homo sapiens	12545	129MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell Map of Diverse Immune Phenotypes in the Metastatic Brain Tumor Microenvironment of Non Small Cell Lung Cancer (lung cancer)	Wang, Liang and Dai, [] Ming-zhu and others	Cancer immunotherapies have shown sustained clinical success in treating primary non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, patients with brain metastasis are excluded from the trials because the brain is viewed traditionally as an immune-privileged organ. The composition and properties of tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells in metastatic brain tumors are mostly unknown. To depict the baseline landscape of the composition, gene signature, and functional states of these immune cells, we performed - single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) for 12,196cellsafter data preprocessing, including 2,241 immunecells from three surgically removed brain lesions of treatment-naïve NSCLC patients. We found a lack of T lymphocyte infiltration and activation, as well as the vast expansion of tumor-associated macrophage(TAM) in the brain lesions of NSCLC patients. By comparing our scRNAseq dataset with published data from early and late-stage primary NSCLC tumors, we showed that this compromised T cell response is unique to brain lesions. We identified a unique alternative activation (M2) gene expression pattern of the TAM in the brain metastasis and a lack of known T cell co-stimulator expression. Accumulation of M2 polarized TAM may, therefore, cause the comprised anti-tumor T cell response in metastatic brain lesions. These findings can contribute to the design of new immunotherapy strategies for NSCLC patients with brain metastasis.	20	GSE143423_lung	Homo sapiens	12196	404MB	RNA	Raw count
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Stomach)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_stomach	Homo sapiens	12106	58MB	RNA	Raw count
Atheroprotective roles of smooth muscle cell phenotypic modulation and the TCF21 disease gene as revealed by single-cell analysis (Human)	Robert C. Wirka, Dhananjay Wagh, [] Thomas Quertermous	In response to various stimuli, vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) can de-differentiate, proliferate and migrate in a process known as phenotypic modulation. However, the phenotype of modulated SMCs in vivo during atherosclerosis and the influence of this process on coronary artery disease (CAD) risk have not been clearly established. Using single-cell RNA sequencing, we comprehensively characterized the transcriptomic phenotype of modulated SMCs in vivo in atherosclerotic lesions of both mouse and human arteries and found that these cells transform into unique fibroblast-like cells, termed ‘fibromyocytes’, rather than into a classical macrophage phenotype. SMC-specific knockout of TCF21—a causal CAD gene—markedly inhibited SMC phenotypic modulation in mice, leading to the presence of fewer fibromyocytes within lesions as well as within the protective fibrous cap of the lesions. Moreover, TCF21 expression was strongly associated with SMC phenotypic modulation in diseased human coronary arteries, and higher levels of TCF21 expression were associated with decreased CAD risk in human CAD-relevant tissues. These results establish a protective role for both TCF21 and SMC phenotypic modulation in this disease.	20	GSE131778	Homo sapiens	11710	239MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell atlas of colonic CD8+ T cells in ulcerative colitis (cite-seq)	Corridoni, Daniele and Antanaviciute, [] Dai and others	Colonic antigen-experienced lymphocytes such as tissue-resident memory CD8+ T cells can respond rapidly to repeated antigen exposure. However, their cellular phenotypes and the mechanisms by which they drive immune regulation and inflammation remain unclear. Here we compiled an unbiased atlas of human colonic CD8+ T cells in health and ulcerative colitis (UC) using single-cell transcriptomics with T-cell receptor repertoire analysis and mass cytometry. We reveal extensive heterogeneity in CD8+ T-cell composition, including expanded effector and post-effector terminally differentiated CD8+ T cells. While UC-associated CD8+ effector T cells can trigger tissue destruction and produce tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, post-effector cells acquire innate signatures to adopt regulatory functions that may mitigate excessive inflammation. Thus, we identify colonic CD8+ T-cell phenotypes in health and UC, define their clonal relationships and characterize terminally differentiated dysfunctional UC CD8+ T cells expressing IL-26, which attenuate acute colitis in a humanized IL-26 transgenic mouse model.	20	GSE148837_cite	Homo sapiens	11704	184MB	RNA, ADT	Raw count
Intra-and inter-cellular rewiring of the human colon during ulcerative colitis (fibroblasts)	Christopher S. Smillie, Moshe Biton, [] Aviv Regev	Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed risk alleles for ulcerative colitis (UC). To understand their cell type specificities and pathways of action, we generate an atlas of 366,650 cells from the colon mucosa of 18 UC patients and 12 healthy individuals, revealing 51 epithelial, stromal, and immune cell subsets, including BEST4 + enterocytes, microfold-like cells, and IL13RA2 + IL11 + inflammatory fibroblasts, which we associate with resistance to anti-TNF treatment. Inflammatory fibroblasts, inflammatory monocytes, microfold-like cells, and T cells that co-express CD8 and IL-17 expand with disease, forming intercellular interaction hubs. Many UC risk genes are cell type specific and co-regulated within relatively few gene modules, suggesting convergence onto limited sets of cell types and pathways. Using this observation, we nominate and infer functions for specific risk genes across GWAS loci. Our work provides a framework for interrogating complex human diseases and mapping risk variants to cell types and pathways.	20	smillie2019.fibroblast	Homo sapiens	11556	350MB	RNA	Raw count
Dissecting intratumoral myeloid cell plasticity by single cell RNA‐seq	Qianqian Song, Gregory A. Hawkins, [] Wei Zhang	Tumor‐infiltrating myeloid cells are the most abundant leukocyte population within tumors. Molecular cues from the tumor microenvironment promote the differentiation of immature myeloid cells toward an immunosuppressive phenotype. However, the in situ dynamics of the transcriptional reprogramming underlying this process are poorly understood. Therefore, we applied single cell RNA‐seq (scRNA‐seq) to computationally investigate the cellular composition and transcriptional dynamics of tumor and adjacent normal tissues from 4 early‐stage non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Our scRNA‐seq analyses identified 11 485 cells that varied in identity and gene expression traits between normal and tumor tissues. Among these, myeloid cell populations exhibited the most diverse changes between tumor and normal tissues, consistent with tumor‐mediated reprogramming. Through trajectory analysis, we identified a differentiation path from CD14+ monocytes to M2 macrophages (monocyte‐to‐M2). This differentiation path was reproducible across patients, accompanied by increased expression of genes (eg, MRC1/CD206, MSR1/CD204, PPARG, TREM2) with significantly enriched functions (Oxidative phosphorylation and P53 pathway) and decreased expression of genes (eg, CXCL2, IL1B) with significantly enriched functions (TNF‐α signaling via NF‐κB and inflammatory response). Our analysis further identified a co‐regulatory network implicating upstream transcription factors (JUN, NFKBIA) in monocyte‐to‐M2 differentiation, and activated ligand‐receptor interactions (eg, SFTPA1‐TLR2, ICAM1‐ITGAM) suggesting intratumoral mechanisms whereby epithelial cells stimulate monocyte‐to‐M2 differentiation. Overall, our study identified the prevalent monocyte‐to‐M2 differentiation in NSCLC, accompanied by an intricate transcriptional reprogramming mediated by specific transcriptional activators and intercellular crosstalk involving ligand‐receptor interactions.	20	GSE117570	Homo sapiens	11485	208MB	RNA	Raw count
A cancer cell program promotes T cell exclusion and resistance to checkpoint blockade (CDK4/6 inhibition)	Livnat Jerby-Arnon, Parin Shah, [] Aviv Regev	Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) produce durable responses in some melanoma patients, but many patients derive no clinical benefit, and the molecular underpinnings of such resistance remain elusive. Here, we leveraged single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) from 33 melanoma tumors and computational analyses to interrogate malignant cell states that promote immune evasion. We identified a resistance program expressed by malignant cells that is associated with T cell exclusion and immune evasion. The program is expressed prior to immunotherapy, characterizes cold niches in situ, and predicts clinical responses to anti-PD-1 therapy in an independent cohort of 112 melanoma patients. CDK4/6-inhibition represses this program in individual malignant cells, induces senescence, and reduces melanoma tumor outgrowth in mouse models in vivo when given in combination with immunotherapy. Our study provides a high-resolution landscape of ICI-resistant cell states, identifies clinically predictive signatures, and suggests new therapeutic strategies to overcome immunotherapy resistance.	20	GSE115978_resistance	Homo sapiens	11364	1GB	RNA	Log-normalized
Colonic epithelial cell diversity in health and inflammatory bowel disease	Kaushal Parikh, Agne Antanaviciute, [] Alison Simmons	The colonic epithelium facilitates host–microorganism interactions to control mucosal immunity, coordinate nutrient recycling and form a mucus barrier. Breakdown of the epithelial barrier underpins inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, the specific contributions of each epithelial-cell subtype to this process are unknown. Here we profile single colonic epithelial cells from patients with IBD and unaffected controls. We identify previously unknown cellular subtypes, including gradients of progenitor cells, colonocytes and goblet cells within intestinal crypts. At the top of the crypts, we find a previously unknown absorptive cell, expressing the proton channel OTOP2 and the satiety peptide uroguanylin, that senses pH and is dysregulated in inflammation and cancer. In IBD, we observe a positional remodelling of goblet cells that coincides with downregulation of WFDC2—an antiprotease molecule that we find to be expressed by goblet cells and that inhibits bacterial growth. In vivo, WFDC2 preserves the integrity of tight junctions between epithelial cells and prevents invasion by commensal bacteria and mucosal inflammation. We delineate markers and transcriptional states, identify a colonic epithelial cell and uncover fundamental determinants of barrier breakdown in IBD.	20	GSE116222	Homo sapiens	11175	412MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-cell analysis of germinal-center B cells informs on lymphoma cell of origin and outcome (Light zone germinal center B cells)	Antony B Holmes, Clarissa Corinaldesi, [] Katia Basso	In response to T cell-dependent antigens, mature B cells are stimulated to form germinal centers (GCs), the sites of B cell affinity maturation and the cell of origin (COO) of most B cell lymphomas. To explore the dynamics of GC B cell development beyond the known dark zone and light zone compartments, we performed single-cell (sc) transcriptomic analysis on human GC B cells and identified multiple functionally linked subpopulations, including the distinct precursors of memory B cells and plasma cells. The gene expression signatures associated with these GC subpopulations were effective in providing a sc-COO for ∼80% of diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) and identified novel prognostic subgroups of DLBCL.	20	GSE139891_LZ	Homo sapiens	11146	464MB	RNA	Raw count
Lineage tracking reveals dynamic relationships of T cells in colorectal cancer	Lei Zhang, Xin Yu, [] Zemin Zhang	T cells are key elements of cancer immunotherapy1 but certain fundamental properties, such as the development and migration of T cells within tumours, remain unknown. The enormous T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire, which is required for the recognition of foreign and self-antigens2, could serve as lineage tags to track these T cells in tumours3. Here we obtained transcriptomes of 11,138 single T cells from 12 patients with colorectal cancer, and developed single T cell analysis by RNA sequencing and TCR tracking (STARTRAC) indices to quantitatively analyse the dynamic relationships among 20 identified T cell subsets with distinct functions and clonalities. Although both CD8+ effector and ‘exhausted’ T cells exhibited high clonal expansion, they were independently connected with tumour-resident CD8+ effector memory cells, implicating a TCR-based fate decision. Of the CD4+ T cells, most tumour-infiltrating T regulatory (Treg) cells showed clonal exclusivity, whereas certain Treg cell clones were developmentally linked to several T helper (TH) cell clones. Notably, we identified two IFNG+ TH1-like cell clusters in tumours that were associated with distinct IFNγ-regulating transcription factors —the GZMK+ effector memory T cells, which were associated with EOMES and RUNX3, and CXCL13+BHLHE40+ TH1-like cell clusters, which were associated with BHLHE40. Only CXCL13+BHLHE40+ TH1-like cells were preferentially enriched in patients with microsatellite-instable tumours, and this might explain their favourable responses to immune-checkpoint blockade. Furthermore, IGFLR1 was highly expressed in both CXCL13+BHLHE40+ TH1-like cells and CD8+ exhausted T cells and possessed co-stimulatory functions. Our integrated STARTRAC analyses provide a powerful approach to dissect the T cell properties in colorectal cancer comprehensively, and could provide insights into the dynamic relationships of T cells in other cancers.	30	GSE108989	Homo sapiens	11138	576MB	RNA	TPM
A Targeted Multi-omic Analysis Approach Measures Protein Expression and Low-Abundance Transcripts on the Single-Cell Level (T/NK Stimulation)	Florian Mair, Jami R. Erickson, [] Martin Prlic	High-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has become a frequently used tool to assess immune cell heterogeneity. Recently, the combined measurement of RNA and protein expression was developed, commonly known as cellular indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing (CITE-seq). Acquisition of protein expression data along with transcriptome data resolves some of the limitations inherent to only assessing transcripts but also nearly doubles the sequencing read depth required per single cell. Furthermore, there is still a paucity of analysis tools to visualize combined transcript-protein datasets. Here, we describe a targeted transcriptomics approach that combines an analysis of over 400 genes with simultaneous measurement of over 40 proteins on 2 <97> 104 cells in a single experiment. This targeted approach requires only about one-tenth of the read depth compared to a whole-transcriptome approach while retaining high sensitivity for low abundance transcripts. To analyze these multi-omic datasets, we adapted one-dimensional soli expression by nonlinear stochastic embedding (One-SENSE) for intuitive visualization of protein-transcript relationships on a single-cell level.	20	GSE135325_stim	Homo sapiens	10607	13MB	RNA, ADT	Raw count
Single-Cell Analyses Inform Mechanisms of Myeloid-Targeted Therapies in Colon Cancer (SMART-Seq2)	Zhang, Lei, [] Aeryon	Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a powerful tool for defining cellular diversity in tumors, but its application toward dissecting mechanisms underlying immune-modulating therapies is scarce. We performed scRNA-seq analyses on immune and stromal populations from colorectal cancer patients, identifying specific macrophage and conventional dendritic cell (cDC) subsets as key mediators of cellular cross-talk in the tumor microenvironment. Defining comparable myeloid populations in mouse tumors enabled characterization of their response to myeloid-targeted immunotherapy. Treatment with anti-CSF1R preferentially depleted macrophages with an inflammatory signature but spared macrophage populations that in mouse and human expresses pro-angiogenic/tumorigenic genes. Treatment with a CD40 agonist antibody preferentially activated a cDC population and increased Bhlhe40+ Th1-like cells and CD8+ memory T cells. Our comprehensive analysis of key myeloid subsets in human and mouse identifies critical cellular interactions regulating tumor immunity and defines mechanisms underlying myeloid-targeted immunotherapies currently undergoing clinical testing.	20	GSE146771_smartseq	Homo sapiens	10468	1GB	RNA	Log-normalized
A cellular census of human lungs identifies novel cell states in health and in asthma	Felipe A. Vieira Braga, Gozde Kar, [] Martijn C. Nawijn & Sarah A. Teichmann	Human lungs enable efficient gas exchange and form an interface with the environment, which depends on mucosal immunity for protection against infectious agents. Tightly controlled interactions between structural and immune cells are required to maintain lung homeostasis. Here, we use single-cell transcriptomics to chart the cellular landscape of upper and lower airways and lung parenchyma in healthy lungs, and lower airways in asthmatic lungs. We report location-dependent airway epithelial cell states and a novel subset of tissue-resident memory T cells. In the lower airways of patients with asthma, mucous cell hyperplasia is shown to stem from a novel mucous ciliated cell state, as well as goblet cell hyperplasia. We report the presence of pathogenic effector type 2 helper T cells (TH2) in asthmatic lungs and find evidence for type 2 cytokines in maintaining the altered epithelial cell states. Unbiased analysis of cell–cell interactions identifies a shift from airway structural cell communication in healthy lungs to a TH2-dominated interactome in asthmatic lungs.	20	GSE130148	Homo sapiens	10360	120MB	RNA	Raw count
Rapid non-uniform adaptation to conformation-specific KRAS(G12C) inhibition	Jenny Y. Xue, Yulei Zhao, [] Piro Lito	KRAS GTPases are activated in one-third of cancers, and KRAS(G12C) is one of the most common activating alterations in lung adenocarcinoma. KRAS(G12C) inhibitors are in phase-I clinical trials and early data show partial responses in nearly half of patients with lung cancer. How cancer cells bypass inhibition to prevent maximal response to therapy is not understood. Because KRAS(G12C) cycles between an active and inactive conformation4-6, and the inhibitors bind only to the latter, we tested whether isogenic cell populations respond in a non-uniform manner by studying the effect of treatment at a single-cell resolution. Here we report that, shortly after treatment, some cancer cells are sequestered in a quiescent state with low KRAS activity, whereas others bypass this effect to resume proliferation. This rapid divergent response occurs because some quiescent cells produce new KRAS(G12C) in response to suppressed mitogen-activated protein kinase output. New KRAS(G12C) is maintained in its active, drug-insensitive state by epidermal growth factor receptor and aurora kinase signalling. Cells without these adaptive changes-or cells in which these changes are pharmacologically inhibited-remain sensitive to drug treatment, because new KRAS(G12C) is either not available or exists in its inactive, drug-sensitive state. The direct targeting of KRAS oncoproteins has been a longstanding objective in precision oncology. Our study uncovers a flexible non-uniform fitness mechanism that enables groups of cells within a population to rapidly bypass the effect of treatment. This adaptive process must be overcome if we are to achieve complete and durable responses in the clinic	20	GSE137912	Homo sapiens	10177	445MB	RNA	Raw count
Defining inflammatory cell states in rheumatoid arthritis joint synovial tissues by integrating single-cell transcriptomics and mass cytometry	Fan Zhang, Kevin Wei, [] Soumya Raychaudhuri	To define the cell populations that drive joint inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), we applied single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), mass cytometry, bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and flow cytometry to T cells, B cells, monocytes, and fibroblasts from 51 samples of synovial tissue from patients with RA or osteoarthritis (OA). Utilizing an integrated strategy based on canonical correlation analysis of 5,265 scRNA-seq profiles, we identified 18 unique cell populations. Combining mass cytometry and transcriptomics revealed cell states expanded in RA synovia: THY1(CD90)+HLA-DRAhi sublining fibroblasts, IL1B+ pro-inflammatory monocytes, ITGAX+TBX21+ autoimmune-associated B cells and PDCD1+ peripheral helper T (TPH) cells and follicular helper T (TFH) cells. We defined distinct subsets of CD8+ T cells characterized by GZMK+, GZMB+, and GNLY+ phenotypes. We mapped inflammatory mediators to their source cell populations; for example, we attributed IL6 expression to THY1+HLA-DRAhi fibroblasts and IL1B production to pro-inflammatory monocytes. These populations are potentially key mediators of RA pathogenesis.	20	SDY998	Homo sapiens	10066	1023MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell atlas of colonic CD8+ T cells in ulcerative colitis	Corridoni, Daniele and Antanaviciute, [] Dai and others	Colonic antigen-experienced lymphocytes such as tissue-resident memory CD8+ T cells can respond rapidly to repeated antigen exposure. However, their cellular phenotypes and the mechanisms by which they drive immune regulation and inflammation remain unclear. Here we compiled an unbiased atlas of human colonic CD8+ T cells in health and ulcerative colitis (UC) using single-cell transcriptomics with T-cell receptor repertoire analysis and mass cytometry. We reveal extensive heterogeneity in CD8+ T-cell composition, including expanded effector and post-effector terminally differentiated CD8+ T cells. While UC-associated CD8+ effector T cells can trigger tissue destruction and produce tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, post-effector cells acquire innate signatures to adopt regulatory functions that may mitigate excessive inflammation. Thus, we identify colonic CD8+ T-cell phenotypes in health and UC, define their clonal relationships and characterize terminally differentiated dysfunctional UC CD8+ T cells expressing IL-26, which attenuate acute colitis in a humanized IL-26 transgenic mouse model.	20	GSE148837	Homo sapiens	10005	860MB	RNA	Raw count
Tumor Cell Biodiversity Drives Microenvironmental Reprogramming in Liver Cancer	Lichun Ma, Maria O. Hernandez, [] Xin Wei Wang	Cellular diversity in tumors is a key factor for therapeutic failures and lethal outcomes of solid malignancies. Here, we determined the single-cell transcriptomic landscape of liver cancer biospecimens from 19 patients. We found varying degrees of heterogeneity in malignant cells within and between tumors and diverse landscapes of tumor microenvironment (TME). Strikingly, tumors with higher transcriptomic diversity were associated with patient's worse overall survival. We found a link between hypoxia-dependent vascular endothelial growth factor expression in tumor diversity and TME polarization. Moreover, T cells from higher heterogeneous tumors showed lower cytolytic activities. Consistent results were found using bulk genomic and transcriptomic profiles of 765 liver tumors. Our results offer insight into the diverse ecosystem of liver cancer and its impact on patient prognosis.	20	GSE125449	Homo sapiens	9946	300MB	RNA	Raw count
Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor microenvironment (myeloid cells)	Diether Lambrechts, Els Wauters, [] Bernard Thienpont	Cancer cells are embedded in the tumor microenvironment (TME), a complex ecosystem of stromal cells. Here, we present a 52,698-cell catalog of the TME transcriptome in human lung tumors at single-cell resolution, validated in independent samples where 40,250 additional cells were sequenced. By comparing with matching non-malignant lung samples, we reveal a highly complex TME that profoundly molds stromal cells. We identify 52 stromal cell subtypes, including novel subpopulations in cell types hitherto considered to be homogeneous, as well as transcription factors underlying their heterogeneity. For instance, we discover fibroblasts expressing different collagen sets, endothelial cells downregulating immune cell homing and genes coregulated with established immune checkpoint transcripts and correlating with T-cell activity. By assessing marker genes for these cell subtypes in bulk RNA-sequencing data from 1,572 patients, we illustrate how these correlate with survival, while immunohistochemistry for selected markers validates them as separate cellular entities in an independent series of lung tumors. Hence, in providing a comprehensive catalog of stromal cells types and by characterizing their phenotype and co-optive behavior, this resource provides deeper insights into lung cancer biology that will be helpful in advancing lung cancer diagnosis and therapy.	20	E-MTAB-6149_myeloid	Homo sapiens	9708	333MB	RNA	Raw count
Heterogeneity of human bone marrow and blood natural killer cells defined by single-cell transcriptome	Yang, Chao and Siebert, [] Karen-Sue and others	Natural killer (NK) cells are critical to both innate and adaptive immunity. However, the development and heterogeneity of human NK cells are yet to be fully defined. Using single-cell RNA-sequencing technology, here we identify distinct NK populations in human bone marrow and blood, including one population expressing higher levels of immediate early genes indicative of a homeostatic activation. Functionally matured NK cells with high expression of CX3CR1, HAVCR2 (TIM-3), and ZEB2 represents terminally differentiated status with the unique transcriptional profile. Transcriptomic and pseudotime analyses identify a transitional population between CD56bright and CD56dim NK cells. Finally, a donor with GATA2T354M mutation exhibits reduced percentage of CD56bright NK cells with altered transcriptome and elevated cell death. These data expand our understanding of the heterogeneity and development of human NK cells.	20	GSE130430	Homo sapiens	9694	133MB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell landscape of high-grade serous ovarian cancer (10X)	Benjamin Izar, Itay Tirosh, [] Aviv Regev	Malignant abdominal fluid (ascites) frequently develops in women with advanced high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) and is associated with drug resistance and a poor prognosis1. To comprehensively characterize the HGSOC ascites ecosystem, we used single-cell RNA sequencing to profile ~11,000 cells from 22 ascites specimens from 11 patients with HGSOC. We found significant inter-patient variability in the composition and functional programs of ascites cells, including immunomodulatory fibroblast sub-populations and dichotomous macrophage populations. We found that the previously described immunoreactive and mesenchymal subtypes of HGSOC, which have prognostic implications, reflect the abundance of immune infiltrates and fibroblasts rather than distinct subsets of malignant cells2. Malignant cell variability was partly explained by heterogeneous copy number alteration patterns or expression of a stemness program. Malignant cells shared expression of inflammatory programs that were largely recapitulated in single-cell RNA sequencing of ~35,000 cells from additionally collected samples, including three ascites, two primary HGSOC tumors and three patient ascites-derived xenograft models. Inhibition of the JAK/STAT pathway, which was expressed in both malignant cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts, had potent anti-tumor activity in primary short-term cultures and patient-derived xenograft models. Our work contributes to resolving the HSGOC landscape3,4,5 and provides a resource for the development of novel therapeutic approaches.	20	GSE146026_10X	Homo sapiens	9609	316MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Endothelial cell)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	20	Qian_et_al_2020_EC	Homo sapiens	9476	279MB	RNA	Raw count
A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single-cell RNA sequencing (Smart-Seq 2)	Kyle J. Travaglini, ProfileAhmad N. Nabhan, [] Mark A. Krasnow	Although single cell RNA sequencing studies have begun providing compendia of cell expression profiles, it has proven more difficult to systematically identify and localize all molecular cell types in individual organs to create a full molecular cell atlas. Here we describe droplet- and plate-based single cell RNA sequencing applied to ∼70,000 human lung and blood cells, combined with a multi-pronged cell annotation approach, which have allowed us to define the gene expression profiles and anatomical locations of 58 cell populations in the human lung, including 41 of 45 previously known cell types or subtypes and 14 new ones. This comprehensive molecular atlas elucidates the biochemical functions of lung cell types and the cell-selective transcription factors and optimal markers for making and monitoring them; defines the cell targets of circulating hormones and predicts local signaling interactions including sources and targets of chemokines in immune cell trafficking and expression changes on lung homing; and identifies the cell types directly affected by lung disease genes. Comparison to mouse identified 17 molecular types that appear to have been gained or lost during lung evolution and others whose expression profiles have been substantially altered, revealing extensive plasticity of cell types and cell-type-specific gene expression during organ evolution including expression switches between cell types. This lung atlas provides the molecular foundation for investigating how lung cell identities, functions, and interactions are achieved in development and tissue engineering and altered in disease and evolution.	20	Travaglini2020_SS2	Homo sapiens	9409	381MB	RNA	Read count
Single-cell analysis of germinal-center B cells informs on lymphoma cell of origin and outcome (GC3_CITE-seq)	Antony B Holmes, Clarissa Corinaldesi, [] Katia Basso	In response to T cell-dependent antigens, mature B cells are stimulated to form germinal centers (GCs), the sites of B cell affinity maturation and the cell of origin (COO) of most B cell lymphomas. To explore the dynamics of GC B cell development beyond the known dark zone and light zone compartments, we performed single-cell (sc) transcriptomic analysis on human GC B cells and identified multiple functionally linked subpopulations, including the distinct precursors of memory B cells and plasma cells. The gene expression signatures associated with these GC subpopulations were effective in providing a sc-COO for ∼80% of diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) and identified novel prognostic subgroups of DLBCL.	20	GSE139891_GC3_CITEseq	Homo sapiens	9290	302MB	RNA, ADT	Raw count
Structural Remodeling of the Human Colonic Mesenchyme in Inflammatory Bowel Disease (Human)	James Kinchen, Hannah H. Chen, [] Alison Simmons	Intestinal mesenchymal cells play essential roles in epithelial homeostasis, matrix remodeling, immunity, and inflammation. But the extent of heterogeneity within the colonic mesenchyme in these processes remains unknown. Using unbiased single-cell profiling of over 16,500 colonic mesenchymal cells, we reveal four subsets of fibroblasts expressing divergent transcriptional regulators and functional pathways, in addition to pericytes and myofibroblasts. We identified a niche population located in proximity to epithelial crypts expressing SOX6, F3 (CD142), and WNT genes essential for colonic epithelial stem cell function. In colitis, we observed dysregulation of this niche and emergence of an activated mesenchymal population. This subset expressed TNF superfamily member 14 (TNFSF14), fibroblastic reticular cell-associated genes, IL-33, and Lysyl oxidases. Further, it induced factors that impaired epithelial proliferation and maturation and contributed to oxidative stress and disease severity in vivo. Our work defines how the colonic mesenchyme remodels to fuel inflammation and barrier dysfunction in IBD.	20	GSE114374	Homo sapiens	9281	743MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Comparative Analysis and Refinement of Human PSC-Derived Kidney Organoid Differentiation with Single-Cell Transcriptomics (Takasato - Lineage reconstruction)	Haojia Wu, Kohei Uchimura, [] Benjamin D. Humphreys	Kidney organoids derived from human pluripotent stem cells have great utility for investigating organogenesis and disease mechanisms and, potentially, as a replacement tissue source, but how closely organoids derived from current protocols replicate adult human kidney is undefined. We compared two directed differentiation protocols by single-cell transcriptomics of 83,130 cells from 65 organoids with single-cell transcriptomes of fetal and adult kidney cells. Both protocols generate a diverse range of kidney cells with differing ratios, but organoid-derived cell types are immature, and 10%-20% of cells are non-renal. Reconstructing lineage relationships by pseudotemporal ordering identified ligands, receptors, and transcription factor networks associated with fate decisions. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its cognate receptor NTRK2 were expressed in the neuronal lineage during organoid differentiation. Inhibiting this pathway improved organoid formation by reducing neurons by 90% without affecting kidney differentiation, highlighting the power of single-cell technologies to characterize and improve organoid differentiation.	20	GSE118184_organoid_timecourse	Homo sapiens	9190	103MB	RNA	Raw count
Global characterization of T cells in non-small-cell lung cancer by single-cell sequencing	Xinyi Guo, Yuanyuan Zhang, [] Zemin Zhang	Cancer immunotherapies have shown sustained clinical responses in treating non-small-cell lung cancer1,2,3, but efficacy varies and depends in part on the amount and properties of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes4,5,6. To depict the baseline landscape of the composition, lineage and functional states of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, here we performed deep single-cell RNA sequencing for 12,346 T cells from 14 treatment-naïve non-small-cell lung cancer patients. Combined expression and T cell antigen receptor based lineage tracking revealed a significant proportion of inter-tissue effector T cells with a highly migratory nature. As well as tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells undergoing exhaustion, we observed two clusters of cells exhibiting states preceding exhaustion, and a high ratio of “pre-exhausted” to exhausted T cells was associated with better prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma. Additionally, we observed further heterogeneity within the tumor regulatory T cells (Tregs), characterized by the bimodal distribution of TNFRSF9, an activation marker for antigen-specific Tregs. The gene signature of those activated tumor Tregs, which included IL1R2, correlated with poor prognosis in lung adenocarcinoma. Our study provides a new approach for patient stratification and will help further understand the functional states and dynamics of T cells in lung cancer.	20	GSE99254	Homo sapiens	9055	750MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (Uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	20	GSE154763_UCEC	Homo sapiens	8808	331MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression (Thymus)	Cao, Junyue and O’Day, [] Fan and others	The gene expression program underlying the specification of human cell types is of fundamental interest. We generated human cell atlases of gene expression and chromatin accessibility in fetal tissues. For gene expression, we applied three-level combinatorial indexing to >110 samples representing 15 organs, ultimately profiling ~4 million single cells. We leveraged the literature and other atlases to identify and annotate hundreds of cell types and subtypes, both within and across tissues. Our analyses focused on organ-specific specializations of broadly distributed cell types (such as blood, endothelial, and epithelial), sites of fetal erythropoiesis (which notably included the adrenal gland), and integration with mouse developmental atlases (such as conserved specification of blood cells). These data represent a rich resource for the exploration of in vivo human gene expression in diverse tissues and cell types.	100	GSE156793_thymus	Homo sapiens	8779	33MB	RNA	Raw count
SFRP2/DPP4 and FMO1/LSP1 Define Major Fibroblast Populations in Human Skin	Tracy Tabib, Christina Morse, [] Robert Lafyatis	Fibroblasts produce matrix, regulate inflammation, mediate reparative processes, and serve as pluripotent mesenchymal cells. Analyzing digested normal human skin by single-cell RNA sequencing, we explored different fibroblast populations. T-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding and clustering of single-cell RNA sequencing data from six biopsy samples showed two major fibroblast populations, defined by distinct genes, including SFRP2 and FMO1, expressed exclusively by these two major fibroblast populations. Further subpopulations were defined within each of the SFRP2 and FMO1 populations and five minor fibroblast populations, each expressing discrete genes: CRABP1, COL11A1, FMO2, PRG4, or C2ORF40. Immunofluorescent staining confirmed that SFRP2 and FMO1 define cell types of dramatically different morphology. SFRP2+ fibroblasts were small, elongated, and distributed between collagen bundles. FMO1+ fibroblasts were larger and distributed in both interstitial and perivascular locations. Differential gene expression by SFRP2+, FMO1+, and COL11A1+ fibroblasts suggests roles in matrix deposition, inflammatory cell retention, and connective tissue cell differentiation, respectively.	20	tabib2018	Homo sapiens	8522	129MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell analysis of germinal-center B cells informs on lymphoma cell of origin and outcome (Dark zone germinal center B cells)	Antony B Holmes, Clarissa Corinaldesi, [] Katia Basso	In response to T cell-dependent antigens, mature B cells are stimulated to form germinal centers (GCs), the sites of B cell affinity maturation and the cell of origin (COO) of most B cell lymphomas. To explore the dynamics of GC B cell development beyond the known dark zone and light zone compartments, we performed single-cell (sc) transcriptomic analysis on human GC B cells and identified multiple functionally linked subpopulations, including the distinct precursors of memory B cells and plasma cells. The gene expression signatures associated with these GC subpopulations were effective in providing a sc-COO for ∼80% of diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) and identified novel prognostic subgroups of DLBCL.	20	GSE139891_DZ	Homo sapiens	8502	387MB	RNA	Raw count
Single cell RNA sequencing of human liver reveals distinct intrahepatic macrophage populations	Sonya A. MacParland, Jeff C. Liu, [] Ian D. McGilvray	The liver is the largest solid organ in the body and is critical for metabolic and immune functions. However, little is known about the cells that make up the human liver and its immune microenvironment. Here we report a map of the cellular landscape of the human liver using single-cell RNA sequencing. We provide the transcriptional profiles of 8444 parenchymal and non-parenchymal cells obtained from the fractionation of fresh hepatic tissue from five human livers. Using gene expression patterns, flow cytometry, and immunohistochemical examinations, we identify 20 discrete cell populations of hepatocytes, endothelial cells, cholangiocytes, hepatic stellate cells, B cells, conventional and non-conventional T cells, NK-like cells, and distinct intrahepatic monocyte/macrophage populations. Together, our study presents a comprehensive view of the human liver at single-cell resolution that outlines the characteristics of resident cells in the liver, and in particular provides a map of the human hepatic immune microenvironment.	20	sonya2018	Homo sapiens	8444	144MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell analysis of germinal-center B cells informs on lymphoma cell of origin and outcome (Germinal center B cells)	Antony B Holmes, Clarissa Corinaldesi, [] Katia Basso	In response to T cell-dependent antigens, mature B cells are stimulated to form germinal centers (GCs), the sites of B cell affinity maturation and the cell of origin (COO) of most B cell lymphomas. To explore the dynamics of GC B cell development beyond the known dark zone and light zone compartments, we performed single-cell (sc) transcriptomic analysis on human GC B cells and identified multiple functionally linked subpopulations, including the distinct precursors of memory B cells and plasma cells. The gene expression signatures associated with these GC subpopulations were effective in providing a sc-COO for ∼80% of diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) and identified novel prognostic subgroups of DLBCL.	20	GSE139891_GCB	Homo sapiens	8429	201MB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors (Melanoma)	Slyper, Michal and Porter, [] Danielle and others	Single-cell genomics is essential to chart tumor ecosystems. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) profiles RNA from cells dissociated from fresh tumors, single-nucleus RNA-Seq (snRNA-Seq) is needed to profile frozen or hard-to-dissociate tumors. Each requires customization to different tissue and tumor types, posing a barrier to adoption. Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei from 40 samples across 23 specimens spanning eight tumor types of varying tissue and sample characteristics. We evaluated protocols by cell and nucleus quality, recovery rate and cellular composition. scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq from matched samples recovered the same cell types, but at different proportions. Our work provides guidance for studies in a broad range of tumors, including criteria for testing and selecting methods from the toolbox for other tumors, thus paving the way for charting tumor atlases.	20	GSE140819_Melanoma	Homo sapiens	8135	189MB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell map of intratumoral changes during anti-PD1 treatment of patients with breast cancer (Cohort 1 - Myeloid)	Ayse Bassez, Hanne Vos, [] Diether Lambrechts	Immune-checkpoint blockade (ICB) combined with neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves pathological complete response in breast cancer. To understand why only a subset of tumors respond to ICB, patients with hormone receptor-positive or triple-negative breast cancer were treated with anti-PD1 before surgery. Paired pre- versus on-treatment biopsies from treatment-naive patients receiving anti-PD1 (n = 29) or patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy before anti-PD1 (n = 11) were subjected to single-cell transcriptome, T cell receptor and proteome profiling. One-third of tumors contained PD1-expressing T cells, which clonally expanded upon anti-PD1 treatment, irrespective of tumor subtype. Expansion mainly involved CD8+ T cells with pronounced expression of cytotoxic-activity (PRF1, GZMB), immune-cell homing (CXCL13) and exhaustion markers (HAVCR2, LAG3), and CD4+ T cells characterized by expression of T-helper-1 (IFNG) and follicular-helper (BCL6, CXCR5) markers. In pre-treatment biopsies, the relative frequency of immunoregulatory dendritic cells (PD-L1+), specific macrophage phenotypes (CCR2+ or MMP9+) and cancer cells exhibiting major histocompatibility complex class I/II expression correlated positively with T cell expansion. Conversely, undifferentiated pre-effector/memory T cells (TCF7+, GZMK+) or inhibitory macrophages (CX3CR1+, C3+) were inversely correlated with T cell expansion. Collectively, our data identify various immunophenotypes and associated gene sets that are positively or negatively correlated with T cell expansion following anti-PD1 treatment. We shed light on the heterogeneity in treatment response to anti-PD1 in breast cancer.	20	ayse_et_al_2021_cohort1_mye	Homo sapiens	7952	245MB	RNA	Raw count
Single cell transcriptomics identifies stem cell-derived graft composition in a model of Parkinson's disease (10X)	Katarina Tiklova, Sara Nolbrant, [] Malin Parmar	Cell replacement is a long-standing and realistic goal for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). Cells for transplantation can be obtained from fetal brain tissue or from stem cells. However, after transplantation, dopamine (DA) neurons are seen to be a minor component of grafts, and it has remained difficult to determine the identity of other cell types. Here, we report analysis by single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) combined with comprehensive histological analyses to characterize intracerebral grafts from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and fetal tissue after functional maturation in a pre-clinical rat PD model. We show that neurons and astrocytes are major components in both fetal and stem cell-derived grafts. Additionally, we identify a cell type closely resembling a class of recently identified perivascular-like cells in stem cell-derived grafts. Thus, this study uncovers previously unknown cellular diversity in a clinically relevant cell replacement PD model.	20	GSE132758	Homo sapiens	7875	267MB	RNA	Raw count
Reconstructed Single-Cell Fate Trajectories Define Lineage Plasticity Windows during Differentiation of Human PSC-Derived Distal Lung Progenitors (Lentiviral barcoding)	Killian Hurley, Jun Ding, [] Darrell N Kotton	Alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (AEC2s) are the facultative progenitors responsible for maintaining lung alveoli throughout life but are difficult to isolate from patients. Here, we engineer AEC2s from human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) in vitro and use time-series single-cell RNA sequencing with lentiviral barcoding to profile the kinetics of their differentiation in comparison to primary fetal and adult AEC2 benchmarks. We observe bifurcating cell-fate trajectories as primordial lung progenitors differentiate in vitro, with some progeny reaching their AEC2 fate target, while others diverge to alternative non-lung endodermal fates. We develop a Continuous State Hidden Markov model to identify the timing and type of signals, such as overexuberant Wnt responses, that induce some early multipotent NKX2-1+ progenitors to lose lung fate. Finally, we find that this initial developmental plasticity is regulatable and subsides over time, ultimately resulting in PSC-derived AEC2s that exhibit a stable phenotype and nearly limitless self-renewal capacity.	20	hurley_et_al_2020_lentiviral	Homo sapiens	7791	162MB	RNA	Log-normalized
The Dynamic Transcriptional Cell Atlas of Testis Development during Human Puberty	Jingtao Guo, Xichen Nie, [] Bradley R.Cairns	The human testis undergoes dramatic developmental and structural changes during puberty, including proliferation and maturation of somatic niche cells, and the onset of spermatogenesis. To characterize this understudied process, we profiled and analyzed single-cell transcriptomes of ∼10,000 testicular cells from four boys spanning puberty and compared them to those of infants and adults. During puberty, undifferentiated spermatogonia sequentially expand and differentiate prior to the initiation of gametogenesis. Notably, we identify a common pre-pubertal progenitor for Leydig and myoid cells and delineate candidate factors controlling pubertal differentiation. Furthermore, pre-pubertal Sertoli cells exhibit two distinct transcriptional states differing in metabolic profiles before converging to an alternative single mature population during puberty. Roles for testosterone in Sertoli cell maturation, antimicrobial peptide secretion, and spermatogonial differentiation are further highlighted through single-cell analysis of testosterone-suppressed transfemale testes. Taken together, our transcriptional atlas of the developing human testis provides multiple insights into developmental changes and key factors accompanying male puberty.	20	GSE134144	Homo sapiens	7720	340MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (Esophageal carcinoma)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	20	GSE154763_ESCA	Homo sapiens	7673	268MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (Myeloma)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	20	GSE154763_MYE	Homo sapiens	7619	261MB	RNA	Log-normalized
In vivo developmental trajectories of human podocyte inform in vitro differentiation of pluripotent stem cell-derived podocytes	Tracy Tran, Nils O. Lindstrom, [] Andrew P. McMahon	The renal corpuscle of the kidney comprises a glomerular vasculature embraced by podocytes and supported by mesangial myofibroblasts, which ensure plasma filtration at the podocyte-generated slit diaphragm. With a spectrum of podocyte-expressed gene mutations causing chronic disease, an enhanced understanding of podocyte development and function to create relevant in vitro podocyte models is a clinical imperative. To characterize podocyte development, scRNA-seq was performed on human fetal kidneys, identifying distinct transcriptional signatures accompanying the differentiation of functional podocytes from progenitors. Interestingly, organoid-generated podocytes exhibited highly similar, progressive transcriptional profiles despite an absence of the vasculature, although abnormal gene expression was pinpointed in late podocytes. On transplantation into mice, organoid-derived podocytes recruited the host vasculature and partially corrected transcriptional profiles. Thus, human podocyte development is mostly intrinsically regulated and vascular interactions refine maturation. These studies support the application of organoid-derived podocytes to model disease and to restore or replace normal kidney functions.	20	GSE124472	Homo sapiens	7553	383MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA sequencing of psoriatic skin identifies pathogenic Tc17 cell subsets and reveals distinctions between CD8 + T cells in autoimmunity and cancer	Jared Liu, PhD, [] MD	Background: Psoriasis is an inflammatory, IL-17-driven skin disease in which autoantigen-induced CD8+ T cells have been identified as pathogenic drivers. Objective: Our study focused on comprehensively characterizing the phenotypic variation of CD8+ T cells in psoriatic lesions. Methods: We used single-cell RNA-seq to compare CD8+ T cell transcriptomic heterogeneity between psoriatic and healthy skin. Results: We identified 11 transcriptionally diverse CD8+ T cell subsets in psoriatic and healthy skin. Among several inflammatory subsets enriched in psoriatic skin, we observed two Tc17 subsets that were metabolically divergent, developmentally related, and expressed CXCL13, which we found to be a biomarker of psoriasis severity and which achieved comparable or greater accuracy than IL17A in a support vector machine classifier of psoriasis and healthy transcriptomes. Despite high co-inhibitory receptor expression in the Tc17 clusters, a comparison of these cells with melanoma-infiltrating CD8+ T cells revealed upregulated cytokine, cytolytic, and metabolic transcriptional activity in the psoriatic cells that differed from an exhaustion program. Conclusion: Using high resolution single cell profiling in tissue, we have uncovered the diverse landscape of CD8+ T cells in psoriatic and healthy skin, including two non-exhausted Tc17 subsets associated with disease severity.	20	GSE146264	Homo sapiens	7304	562MB	RNA	Raw count
Spontaneously Resolved Atopic Dermatitis Shows Melanocyte and Immune Cell Activation Distinct From Healthy Control Skin (Healthy control versus spontaneously healed atopic dermatitis)	Rindler K, Krausgruber T, [] Brunner PM	Atopic dermatitis (AD) typically starts in infancy or early childhood, showing spontaneous remission in a subset of patients, while others develop lifelong disease. Despite an increased understanding of AD, factors guiding its natural course are only insufficiently elucidated. We thus performed suction blistering in skin of adult patients with stable, spontaneous remission from previous moderate-to-severe AD during childhood. Samples were compared to healthy controls without personal or familial history of atopy, and to chronic, active AD lesions. Skin cells and tissue fluid obtained were used for single-cell RNA sequencing and proteomic multiplex assays, respectively. We found overall cell composition and proteomic profiles of spontaneously healed AD to be comparable to healthy control skin, without upregulation of typical AD activity markers (e.g., IL13, S100As, and KRT16). Among all cell types in spontaneously healed AD, melanocytes harbored the largest numbers of differentially expressed genes in comparison to healthy controls, with upregulation of potentially anti-inflammatory markers such as PLA2G7. Conventional T-cells also showed increases in regulatory markers, and a general skewing toward a more Th1-like phenotype. By contrast, gene expression of regulatory T-cells and keratinocytes was essentially indistinguishable from healthy skin. Melanocytes and conventional T-cells might thus contribute a specific regulatory milieu in spontaneously healed AD skin.	20	GSE162054_HC_AD	Homo sapiens	7269	159MB	RNA	Raw count
A cancer cell program promotes T cell exclusion and resistance to checkpoint blockade (normal vs malignant)	Livnat Jerby-Arnon, Parin Shah, [] Aviv Regev	Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) produce durable responses in some melanoma patients, but many patients derive no clinical benefit, and the molecular underpinnings of such resistance remain elusive. Here, we leveraged single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) from 33 melanoma tumors and computational analyses to interrogate malignant cell states that promote immune evasion. We identified a resistance program expressed by malignant cells that is associated with T cell exclusion and immune evasion. The program is expressed prior to immunotherapy, characterizes cold niches in situ, and predicts clinical responses to anti-PD-1 therapy in an independent cohort of 112 melanoma patients. CDK4/6-inhibition represses this program in individual malignant cells, induces senescence, and reduces melanoma tumor outgrowth in mouse models in vivo when given in combination with immunotherapy. Our study provides a high-resolution landscape of ICI-resistant cell states, identifies clinically predictive signatures, and suggests new therapeutic strategies to overcome immunotherapy resistance.	20	GSE115978	Homo sapiens	7186	864MB	RNA	Raw count
Landscape and dynamics of single immune cells in hepatocellular carcinoma (Smart-seq2)	Zhang Q, He Y, [] Zhang Z	The immune microenvironment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is poorly characterized. Combining two single-cell RNA sequencing technologies, we produced transcriptomes of CD45 + immune cells for HCC patients from five immune-relevant sites: tumor, adjacent liver, hepatic lymph node (LN), blood, and ascites. A cluster of LAMP3 + dendritic cells (DCs) appeared to be the mature form of conventional DCs and possessed the potential to migrate from tumors to LNs. LAMP3 + DCs also expressed diverse immune-relevant ligands and exhibited potential to regulate multiple subtypes of lymphocytes. Of the macrophages in tumors that exhibited distinct transcriptional states, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were associated with poor prognosis, and we established the inflammatory role of SLC40A1 and GPNMB in these cells. Further, myeloid and lymphoid cells in ascites were predominantly linked to tumor and blood origins, respectively. The dynamic properties of diverse CD45 + cell types revealed by this study add new dimensions to the immune landscape of HCC.	20	GSE140228_smartseq2	Homo sapiens	7074	756MB	RNA	Read count
Collagen-producing lung cell atlas identifies multiple subsets with distinct localization and relevance to fibrosis (IPF cell)	Tatsuya Tsukui, Kai-Hui Sun, [] Dean Sheppard	Collagen-producing cells maintain the complex architecture of the lung and drive pathologic scarring in pulmonary fibrosis. Here we perform single-cell RNA-sequencing to identify all collagen-producing cells in normal and fibrotic lungs. We characterize multiple collagen-producing subpopulations with distinct anatomical localizations in different compartments of murine lungs. One subpopulation, characterized by expression of Cthrc1 (collagen triple helix repeat containing 1), emerges in fibrotic lungs and expresses the highest levels of collagens. Single-cell RNA-sequencing of human lungs, including those from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and scleroderma patients, demonstrate similar heterogeneity and CTHRC1-expressing fibroblasts present uniquely in fibrotic lungs. Immunostaining and in situ hybridization show that these cells are concentrated within fibroblastic foci. We purify collagen-producing subpopulations and find disease-relevant phenotypes of Cthrc1-expressing fibroblasts in in vitro and adoptive transfer experiments. Our atlas of collagen-producing cells provides a roadmap for studying the roles of these unique populations in homeostasis and pathologic fibrosis.	20	GSE147066	Homo sapiens	6607	203MB	RNA	Raw count
A conserved dendritic-cell regulatory program limits antitumour immunity (human)	Barbara Maier, Andrew M. Leader, [] Miriam Merad	Checkpoint blockade therapies have improved cancer treatment, but such immunotherapy regimens fail in a large subset of patients. Conventional type 1 dendritic cells (DC1s) control the response to checkpoint blockade in preclinical models and are associated with better overall survival in patients with cancer, reflecting the specialized ability of these cells to prime the responses of CD8+ T cells1,2,3. Paradoxically, however, DC1s can be found in tumours that resist checkpoint blockade, suggesting that the functions of these cells may be altered in some lesions. Here, using single-cell RNA sequencing in human and mouse non-small-cell lung cancers, we identify a cluster of dendritic cells (DCs) that we name ‘mature DCs enriched in immunoregulatory molecules’ (mregDCs), owing to their coexpression of immunoregulatory genes (Cd274, Pdcd1lg2 and Cd200) and maturation genes (Cd40, Ccr7 and Il12b). We find that the mregDC program is expressed by canonical DC1s and DC2s upon uptake of tumour antigens. We further find that upregulation of the programmed death ligand 1 protein—a key checkpoint molecule—in mregDCs is induced by the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL, while upregulation of interleukin (IL)-12 depends strictly on interferon-γ and is controlled negatively by IL-4 signalling. Blocking IL-4 enhances IL-12 production by tumour-antigen-bearing mregDC1s, expands the pool of tumour-infiltrating effector T cells and reduces tumour burden. We have therefore uncovered a regulatory module associated with tumour-antigen uptake that reduces DC1 functionality in human and mouse cancers.	20	maier2020	Homo sapiens	6506	152MB	RNA, ADT	Raw count
Single-cell profiling of breast cancer T cells reveals a tissue-resident memory subset associated with improved prognosis	Peter Savas, Balaji Virassamy, [] Sherene Loi	The quantity of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in breast cancer (BC) is a robust prognostic factor for improved patient survival, particularly in triple-negative and HER2-overexpressing BC subtypes1. Although T cells are the predominant TIL population2, the relationship between quantitative and qualitative differences in T cell subpopulations and patient prognosis remains unknown. We performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of 6,311 T cells isolated from human BCs and show that significant heterogeneity exists in the infiltrating T cell population. We demonstrate that BCs with a high number of TILs contained CD8+ T cells with features of tissue-resident memory T (TRM) cell differentiation and that these CD8+ TRM cells expressed high levels of immune checkpoint molecules and effector proteins. A CD8+ TRM gene signature developed from the scRNA-seq data was significantly associated with improved patient survival in early-stage triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and provided better prognostication than CD8 expression alone. Our data suggest that CD8+ TRM cells contribute to BC immunosurveillance and are the key targets of modulation by immune checkpoint inhibition. Further understanding of the development, maintenance and regulation of TRM cells will be crucial for successful immunotherapeutic development in BC.	20	GSE110686	Homo sapiens	6311	76MB	RNA	Raw count
Tubular cell and keratinocyte single-cell transcriptomics applied to lupus nephritis reveal type I IFN and fibrosis relevant pathways	Evan Der, Hemant Suryawanshi, [] Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (AMP RA/SLE) Consortium	The molecular and cellular processes that lead to renal damage and to the heterogeneity of lupus nephritis (LN) are not well understood. We applied single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to renal biopsies from patients with LN and evaluated skin biopsies as a potential source of diagnostic and prognostic markers of renal disease. Type I interferon (IFN)-response signatures in tubular cells and keratinocytes distinguished patients with LN from healthy control subjects. Moreover, a high IFN-response signature and fibrotic signature in tubular cells were each associated with failure to respond to treatment. Analysis of tubular cells from patients with proliferative, membranous and mixed LN indicated pathways relevant to inflammation and fibrosis, which offer insight into their histologic differences. In summary, we applied scRNA-seq to LN to deconstruct its heterogeneity and identify novel targets for personalized approaches to therapy.	20	SDY997	Homo sapiens	6142	201MB	RNA	Raw count
Dissecting the cellular specificity of smoking effects and reconstructing lineages in the human airway epithelium (in vitro)	Goldfarbmuren, Katherine C and Jackson, [] Preston E and others	Cigarette smoke first interacts with the lung through the cellularly diverse airway epithelium and goes on to drive development of most chronic lung diseases. Here, through single cell RNA-sequencing analysis of the tracheal epithelium from smokers and non-smokers, we generate a comprehensive atlas of epithelial cell types and states, connect these into lineages, and define cell-specific responses to smoking. Our analysis infers multi-state lineages that develop into surface mucus secretory and ciliated cells and then contrasts these to the unique specification of submucosal gland (SMG) cells. Accompanying knockout studies reveal that tuft-like cells are the likely progenitor of both pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and CFTR-rich ionocytes. Our smoking analysis finds that all cell types, including protected stem and SMG populations, are affected by smoking through both pan-epithelial smoking response networks and hundreds of cell-specific response genes, redefining the penetrance and cellular specificity of smoking effects on the human airway epithelium.	20	GSE134174_invitro	Homo sapiens	5976	196MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of primary and metastatic tumor ecosystems in head and neck cancer	Sidharth V. Puram, Itay Tirosh, [] Bradley E. Bernstein	The diverse malignant, stromal, and immune cells in tumors affect growth, metastasis, and response to therapy. We profiled transcriptomes of ∼6,000 single cells from 18 head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients, including five matched pairs of primary tumors and lymph node metastases. Stromal and immune cells had consistent expression programs across patients. Conversely, malignant cells varied within and between tumors in their expression of signatures related to cell cycle, stress, hypoxia, epithelial differentiation, and partial epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (p-EMT). Cells expressing the p-EMT program spatially localized to the leading edge of primary tumors. By integrating single-cell transcriptomes with bulk expression profiles for hundreds of tumors, we refined HNSCC subtypes by their malignant and stromal composition and established p-EMT as an independent predictor of nodal metastasis, grade, and adverse pathologic features. Our results provide insight into the HNSCC ecosystem and define stromal interactions and a p-EMT program associated with metastasis.	20	GSE103322	Homo sapiens	5902	395MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Homozygous BCMA gene deletion in response to anti-BCMA CAR T cells in a patient with multiple myeloma	Matteo C. Da Vià, Oliver Dietrich, [] Antoine-Emmanuel Saliba and Leo Rasche	B cell maturation antigen (BCMA) is a target for various immunotherapies and a biomarker for tumor load in multiple myeloma (MM). We report a case of irreversible BCMA loss in a patient with MM who was enrolled in the KarMMa trial (NCT03361748) and progressed after anti-BCMA CAR T cell therapy. We identified selection of a clone with homozygous deletion of TNFRSF17 (BCMA) as the underlying mechanism of immune escape. Furthermore, we found heterozygous TNFRSF17 loss or monosomy 16 in 37 out of 168 patients with MM, including 28 out of 33 patients with hyperhaploid MM who had not been previously treated with BCMA-targeting therapies, suggesting that heterozygous TNFRSF17 deletion at baseline could theoretically be a risk factor for BCMA loss after immunotherapy.	20	GSE143317	Homo sapiens	5669	323MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (conventional type 2 dendritic cell)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	20	GSE154763_cDC2	Homo sapiens	5461	221MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A Targeted Multi-omic Analysis Approach Measures Protein Expression and Low-Abundance Transcripts on the Single-Cell Level (10X)	Florian Mair, Jami R. Erickson, [] Martin Prlic	High-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has become a frequently used tool to assess immune cell heterogeneity. Recently, the combined measurement of RNA and protein expression was developed, commonly known as cellular indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing (CITE-seq). Acquisition of protein expression data along with transcriptome data resolves some of the limitations inherent to only assessing transcripts but also nearly doubles the sequencing read depth required per single cell. Furthermore, there is still a paucity of analysis tools to visualize combined transcript-protein datasets. Here, we describe a targeted transcriptomics approach that combines an analysis of over 400 genes with simultaneous measurement of over 40 proteins on 2 <97> 104 cells in a single experiment. This targeted approach requires only about one-tenth of the read depth compared to a whole-transcriptome approach while retaining high sensitivity for low abundance transcripts. To analyze these multi-omic datasets, we adapted one-dimensional soli expression by nonlinear stochastic embedding (One-SENSE) for intuitive visualization of protein-transcript relationships on a single-cell level.	20	GSE135325_10X	Homo sapiens	5416	29MB	RNA	Raw count
A Targeted Multi-omic Analysis Approach Measures Protein Expression and Low-Abundance Transcripts on the Single-Cell Level (Subsample)	Florian Mair, Jami R. Erickson, [] Martin Prlic	High-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has become a frequently used tool to assess immune cell heterogeneity. Recently, the combined measurement of RNA and protein expression was developed, commonly known as cellular indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing (CITE-seq). Acquisition of protein expression data along with transcriptome data resolves some of the limitations inherent to only assessing transcripts but also nearly doubles the sequencing read depth required per single cell. Furthermore, there is still a paucity of analysis tools to visualize combined transcript-protein datasets. Here, we describe a targeted transcriptomics approach that combines an analysis of over 400 genes with simultaneous measurement of over 40 proteins on 2 <97> 104 cells in a single experiment. This targeted approach requires only about one-tenth of the read depth compared to a whole-transcriptome approach while retaining high sensitivity for low abundance transcripts. To analyze these multi-omic datasets, we adapted one-dimensional soli expression by nonlinear stochastic embedding (One-SENSE) for intuitive visualization of protein-transcript relationships on a single-cell level.	20	GSE135325_sub	Homo sapiens	5390	7MB	RNA, ADT	Raw count
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (Thyroid carcinoma)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	20	GSE154763_THCA	Homo sapiens	5312	209MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Landscape of infiltrating T cells in liver cancer revealed by single-cell sequencing	Chunhong Zheng, Liangtao Zheng, [] Zemin Zhang	Systematic interrogation of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes is key to the development of immunotherapies and the prediction of their clinical responses in cancers. Here, we perform deep single-cell RNA sequencing on 5,063 single T cells isolated from peripheral blood, tumor, and adjacent normal tissues from six hepatocellular carcinoma patients. The transcriptional profiles of these individual cells, coupled with assembled T cell receptor (TCR) sequences, enable us to identify 11 T cell subsets based on their molecular and functional properties and delineate their developmental trajectory. Specific subsets such as exhausted CD8+ T cells and Tregs are preferentially enriched and potentially clonally expanded in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and we identified signature genes for each subset. One of the genes, layilin, is upregulated on activated CD8+ T cells and Tregs and represses the CD8+ T cell functions in vitro. This compendium of transcriptome data provides valuable insights and a rich resource for understanding the immune landscape in cancers.	20	GSE98638	Homo sapiens	5063	269MB	RNA	Read count
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors (Glioma)	Slyper, Michal and Porter, [] Danielle and others	Single-cell genomics is essential to chart tumor ecosystems. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) profiles RNA from cells dissociated from fresh tumors, single-nucleus RNA-Seq (snRNA-Seq) is needed to profile frozen or hard-to-dissociate tumors. Each requires customization to different tissue and tumor types, posing a barrier to adoption. Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei from 40 samples across 23 specimens spanning eight tumor types of varying tissue and sample characteristics. We evaluated protocols by cell and nucleus quality, recovery rate and cellular composition. scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq from matched samples recovered the same cell types, but at different proportions. Our work provides guidance for studies in a broad range of tumors, including criteria for testing and selecting methods from the toolbox for other tumors, thus paving the way for charting tumor atlases.	20	GSE140819_glioma	Homo sapiens	5044	153MB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox for fresh and frozen human tumors (CLL)	Slyper, Michal and Porter, [] Danielle and others	Single-cell genomics is essential to chart tumor ecosystems. Although single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) profiles RNA from cells dissociated from fresh tumors, single-nucleus RNA-Seq (snRNA-Seq) is needed to profile frozen or hard-to-dissociate tumors. Each requires customization to different tissue and tumor types, posing a barrier to adoption. Here, we have developed a systematic toolbox for profiling fresh and frozen clinical tumor samples using scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq, respectively. We analyzed 216,490 cells and nuclei from 40 samples across 23 specimens spanning eight tumor types of varying tissue and sample characteristics. We evaluated protocols by cell and nucleus quality, recovery rate and cellular composition. scRNA-Seq and snRNA-Seq from matched samples recovered the same cell types, but at different proportions. Our work provides guidance for studies in a broad range of tumors, including criteria for testing and selecting methods from the toolbox for other tumors, thus paving the way for charting tumor atlases.	20	GSE140819_CLL	Homo sapiens	4901	70MB	RNA	Raw count
Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor microenvironment (B-cell-like cells)	Diether Lambrechts, Els Wauters, [] Bernard Thienpont	Cancer cells are embedded in the tumor microenvironment (TME), a complex ecosystem of stromal cells. Here, we present a 52,698-cell catalog of the TME transcriptome in human lung tumors at single-cell resolution, validated in independent samples where 40,250 additional cells were sequenced. By comparing with matching non-malignant lung samples, we reveal a highly complex TME that profoundly molds stromal cells. We identify 52 stromal cell subtypes, including novel subpopulations in cell types hitherto considered to be homogeneous, as well as transcription factors underlying their heterogeneity. For instance, we discover fibroblasts expressing different collagen sets, endothelial cells downregulating immune cell homing and genes coregulated with established immune checkpoint transcripts and correlating with T-cell activity. By assessing marker genes for these cell subtypes in bulk RNA-sequencing data from 1,572 patients, we illustrate how these correlate with survival, while immunohistochemistry for selected markers validates them as separate cellular entities in an independent series of lung tumors. Hence, in providing a comprehensive catalog of stromal cells types and by characterizing their phenotype and co-optive behavior, this resource provides deeper insights into lung cancer biology that will be helpful in advancing lung cancer diagnosis and therapy.	20	E-MTAB-6149_b	Homo sapiens	4782	83MB	RNA	Raw count
Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq	Itay Tirosh, Benjamin Izar, [] Levi A. Garraway	Tumors harbor multiple cell types that are thought to play a role in the development of resistance to drug treatments. Tirosh et al. used single-cell sequencing to investigate the distribution of these differing genetic profiles within melanomas. Many cells harbored heterogeneous genetic programs that reflected two different states of genetic expression, one of which was linked to resistance development. Following drug treatment, the resistance-linked expression state was found at a much higher level. Furthermore, the environment of the melanoma cells affected their gene expression programs.	20	GSE72056	Homo sapiens	4645	285MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Mapping microglia states in the human brain through the integration of high-dimensional techniques (Control)	Roman Sankowski, Chotima Bottcher, [] Marco Prinz	Microglia are tissue-resident macrophages of the CNS that orchestrate local immune responses and contribute to several neurological and psychiatric diseases. Little is known about human microglia and how they orchestrate their highly plastic, context-specific adaptive responses during pathology. Here we combined two high-dimensional technologies, single-cell RNA-sequencing and time-of-flight mass cytometry, to identify microglia states in the human brain during homeostasis and disease. This approach enabled us to identify and characterize a previously unappreciated spectrum of transcriptional states in human microglia. These transcriptional states are determined by their spatial distribution, and they further change with aging and brain tumor pathology. This description of multiple microglia phenotypes in the human CNS may open promising new avenues for subset-specific therapeutic interventions.	20	GSE135437_control	Homo sapiens	4564	93MB	RNA	Read count
Comparative Analysis and Refinement of Human PSC-Derived Kidney Organoid Differentiation with Single-Cell Transcriptomics (Human - Adult - snRNA)	Haojia Wu, Kohei Uchimura, [] Benjamin D. Humphreys	Kidney organoids derived from human pluripotent stem cells have great utility for investigating organogenesis and disease mechanisms and, potentially, as a replacement tissue source, but how closely organoids derived from current protocols replicate adult human kidney is undefined. We compared two directed differentiation protocols by single-cell transcriptomics of 83,130 cells from 65 organoids with single-cell transcriptomes of fetal and adult kidney cells. Both protocols generate a diverse range of kidney cells with differing ratios, but organoid-derived cell types are immature, and 10%-20% of cells are non-renal. Reconstructing lineage relationships by pseudotemporal ordering identified ligands, receptors, and transcription factor networks associated with fate decisions. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its cognate receptor NTRK2 were expressed in the neuronal lineage during organoid differentiation. Inhibiting this pathway improved organoid formation by reducing neurons by 90% without affecting kidney differentiation, highlighting the power of single-cell technologies to characterize and improve organoid differentiation.	20	GSE118184_adult_sn	Homo sapiens	4524	95MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics of a human kidney allograft biopsy specimen defines a diverse inflammatory response	Haojia Wu, Andrew F. Malone, [] Benjamin D. Humphreys	ackground: Single-cell genomics techniques are revolutionizing our ability to characterize complex tissues. By contrast, the techniques used to analyze renal biopsy specimens have changed little over several decades. We tested the hypothesis that single-cell RNA-sequencing can comprehensively describe cell types and states in a human kidney biopsy specimen. Methods: We generated 8746 single-cell transcriptomes from a healthy adult kidney and a single kidney transplant biopsy core by single-cell RNA-sequencing. Unsupervised clustering analysis of the biopsy specimen was performed to identify 16 distinct cell types, including all of the major immune cell types and most native kidney cell types, in this biopsy specimen, for which the histologic read was mixed rejection. Results: Monocytes formed two subclusters representing a nonclassical CD16+ group and a classic CD16− group expressing dendritic cell maturation markers. The presence of both monocyte cell subtypes was validated by staining of independent transplant biopsy specimens. Comparison of healthy kidney epithelial transcriptomes with biopsy specimen counterparts identified novel segment-specific proinflammatory responses in rejection. Endothelial cells formed three distinct subclusters: resting cells and two activated endothelial cell groups. One activated endothelial cell group expressed Fc receptor pathway activation and Ig internalization genes, consistent with the pathologic diagnosis of antibody-mediated rejection. We mapped previously defined genes that associate with rejection outcomes to single cell types and generated a searchable online gene expression database. Conclusions: We present the first step toward incorporation of single-cell transcriptomics into kidney biopsy specimen interpretation, describe a heterogeneous immune response in mixed rejection, and provide a searchable resource for the scientific community.	20	wu2018.biopsy	Homo sapiens	4487	84MB	RNA	Raw count
Identification of resistance pathways and therapeutic targets in relapsed multiple myeloma patients through single-cell sequencing (Cell line RPMI-8226)	Yael C. Cohen, Mor Zada, [] Ido Amit	Multiple myeloma (MM) is a neoplastic plasma-cell disorder characterized by clonal proliferation of malignant plasma cells. Despite extensive research, disease heterogeneity within and between treatment-resistant patients is poorly characterized. In the present study, we conduct a prospective, multicenter, single-arm clinical trial (NCT04065789), combined with longitudinal single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to study the molecular dynamics of MM resistance mechanisms. Newly diagnosed MM patients (41), who either failed to respond or experienced early relapse after a bortezomib-containing induction regimen, were enrolled to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a daratumumab, carfilzomib, lenalidomide and dexamethasone combination. The primary clinical endpoint was safety and tolerability. Secondary endpoints included overall response rate, progression-free survival and overall survival. Treatment was safe and well tolerated; deep and durable responses were achieved. In prespecified exploratory analyses, comparison of 41 primary refractory and early relapsed patients, with 11 healthy subjects and 15 newly diagnosed MM patients, revealed new MM molecular pathways of resistance, including hypoxia tolerance, protein folding and mitochondria respiration, which generalized to larger clinical cohorts (CoMMpass). We found peptidylprolyl isomerase A (PPIA), a central enzyme in the protein-folding response pathway, as a potential new target for resistant MM. CRISPR–Cas9 deletion of PPIA or inhibition of PPIA with a small molecule inhibitor (ciclosporin) significantly sensitizes MM tumor cells to proteasome inhibitors. Together, our study defines a roadmap for integrating scRNA-seq in clinical trials, identifies a signature of highly resistant MM patients and discovers PPIA as a potent therapeutic target for these tumors.	20	GSE161195_cell_line_invitro	Homo sapiens	4434	134MB	RNA	Raw count
(CITE-seq) Monocytic Subclones Confer Resistance to Venetoclax-Based Therapy in Acute Myeloid Leukemia Patients	Shanshan Pei, Daniel A. Pollyea, [] Craig T. Jordan	Venetoclax-based therapy can induce responses in approximately 70% of older previously untreated acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. However, upfront resistance as well as relapse following initial response demonstrate the need for a deeper understanding of resistance mechanisms. In the present study, we report that responses to venetoclax + azacitidine in AML patients correlate closely with developmental stage, where phenotypically primitive AML is sensitive, but monocytic AML is more resistant. Mechanistically, resistant monocytic AML has a distinct transcriptome profile, loses expression of venetoclax target BCL2 and relies on MCL1 to mediate oxidative phosphorylation and survival. This differential sensitivity drives a selective process in patients which favors the outgrowth of monocytic subpopulations at relapse. Based on these findings, we conclude that resistance to venetoclax + azacitidine can arise due to biological properties intrinsic to monocytic differentiation. We propose that optimal AML therapies should be designed so as to independently target AML subclones that may arise at differing stages of pathogenesis.	20	GSE143363	Homo sapiens	4426	127MB	RNA, ADT	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomics of the human retinal pigment epithelium and choroid in health and macular degeneration (total RPE/choroid)	Andrew P. Voigt, Kelly Mulfaul, [] and Robert F. Mullins	The human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and choroid are complex tissues that provide crucial support to the retina. Disease affecting either of these supportive tissues can lead to irreversible blindness in the setting of age-related macular degeneration. In this study, single-cell RNA sequencing was performed on macular and peripheral regions of RPE-choroid from 7 human donor eyes in 2 independent experiments. In the first experiment, total RPE/choroid preparations were evaluated and expression profiles specific to RPE and major choroidal cell populations were identified. As choroidal endothelial cells represent a minority of the total RPE/choroidal cell population but are strongly implicated in age-related macular degeneration (AMD) pathogenesis, a second single-cell RNA-sequencing experiment was performed using endothelial cells enriched by magnetic separation. In this second study, we identified gene expression signatures along the choroidal vascular tree, classifying the transcriptome of human choriocapillaris, arterial, and venous endothelial cells. We found that the choriocapillaris highly and specifically expresses the regulator of cell cycle gene (RGCC), a gene that responds to complement activation and induces apoptosis in endothelial cells. In addition, RGCC was the most up-regulated choriocapillaris gene in a donor diagnosed with AMD. These results provide a characterization of the human RPE and choriocapillaris transcriptome, offering potential insight into the mechanisms of choriocapillaris response to complement injury and choroidal vascular disease in age-related macular degeneration.	20	GSE135922_all	Homo sapiens	4335	170MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-cell transcriptomics of a human kidney allograft biopsy specimen defines a diverse inflammatory response (healthy)	Haojia Wu, Andrew F. Malone, [] Benjamin D. Humphreys	Background: Single-cell genomics techniques are revolutionizing our ability to characterize complex tissues. By contrast, the techniques used to analyze renal biopsy specimens have changed little over several decades. We tested the hypothesis that single-cell RNA-sequencing can comprehensively describe cell types and states in a human kidney biopsy specimen. Methods: We generated 8746 single-cell transcriptomes from a healthy adult kidney and a single kidney transplant biopsy core by single-cell RNA-sequencing. Unsupervised clustering analysis of the biopsy specimen was performed to identify 16 distinct cell types, including all of the major immune cell types and most native kidney cell types, in this biopsy specimen, for which the histologic read was mixed rejection. Results: Monocytes formed two subclusters representing a nonclassical CD16+ group and a classic CD16− group expressing dendritic cell maturation markers. The presence of both monocyte cell subtypes was validated by staining of independent transplant biopsy specimens. Comparison of healthy kidney epithelial transcriptomes with biopsy specimen counterparts identified novel segment-specific proinflammatory responses in rejection. Endothelial cells formed three distinct subclusters: resting cells and two activated endothelial cell groups. One activated endothelial cell group expressed Fc receptor pathway activation and Ig internalization genes, consistent with the pathologic diagnosis of antibody-mediated rejection. We mapped previously defined genes that associate with rejection outcomes to single cell types and generated a searchable online gene expression database. Conclusions: We present the first step toward incorporation of single-cell transcriptomics into kidney biopsy specimen interpretation, describe a heterogeneous immune response in mixed rejection, and provide a searchable resource for the scientific community.	20	wu2018.healthy	Homo sapiens	4297	97MB	RNA	Raw count
High-Resolution mRNA and Secretome Atlas of Human Enteroendocrine Cells	Beumer, Joep and Puschhof, [] Georg A and others	Enteroendocrine cells (EECs) sense intestinal content and release hormones to regulate gastrointestinal activity, systemic metabolism, and food intake. Little is known about the molecular make-up of human EEC subtypes and the regulated secretion of individual hormones. Here, we describe an organoid-based platform for functional studies of human EECs. EEC formation is induced in vitro by transient expression of NEUROG3. A set of gut organoids was engineered in which the major hormones are fluorescently tagged. A single-cell mRNA atlas was generated for the different EEC subtypes, and their secreted products were recorded by mass-spectrometry. We note key differences to murine EECs, including hormones, sensory receptors, and transcription factors. Notably, several hormone-like molecules were identified. Inter-EEC communication is exemplified by secretin-induced GLP-1 secretion. Indeed, individual EEC subtypes carry receptors for various EEC hormones. This study provides a rich resource to study human EEC development and function.	20	GSE146799	Homo sapiens	4241	142MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell immune landscape of human atherosclerotic plaques (scRNA-seq - T cells - Plaque)	Dawn M. Fernandez, Adeeb H. Rahman, [] Chiara Giannarelli	Atherosclerosis is driven by multifaceted contributions of the immune system within the circulation and at vascular focal sites. However, specific characteristics of dysregulated immune cells within atherosclerotic lesions that lead to clinical events such as ischemic stroke or myocardial infarction are poorly understood. Here, using single-cell proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, we uncovered distinct features of both T cells and macrophages in carotid artery plaques of patients with clinically symptomatic disease (recent stroke or transient ischemic attack) compared to asymptomatic disease (no recent stroke). Plaques from symptomatic patients were characterized by a distinct subset of CD4+ T cells and by T cells that were activated and differentiated. Moreover, some T cell subsets in these plaques presented markers of T cell exhaustion. Additionally, macrophages from these plaques contained alternatively activated phenotypes, including subsets associated with plaque vulnerability. In plaques from asymptomatic patients, T cells and macrophages were activated and displayed evidence of interleukin-1β signaling. The identification of specific features of innate and adaptive immune cells in plaques that are associated with cerebrovascular events may enable the design of more precisely tailored cardiovascular immunotherapies.	20	fernandez_et_al_2019_scrna_t_pl	Homo sapiens	4162	62MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Venetoclax with azacitidine disrupts energy metabolism and targets leukemia stem cells in patients with acute myeloid leukemia	Pollyea, Daniel A and Stevens, [] Austin E and others	Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common acute leukemia in adults. Leukemia stem cells (LSCs) drive the initiation and perpetuation of AML, are quantifiably associated with worse clinical outcomes, and often persist after conventional chemotherapy resulting in relapse1,2,3,4,5. In this report, we show that treatment of older patients with AML with the B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) inhibitor venetoclax in combination with azacitidine results in deep and durable remissions and is superior to conventional treatments. We hypothesized that these promising clinical results were due to targeting LSCs. Analysis of LSCs from patients undergoing treatment with venetoclax + azacitidine showed disruption of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle manifested by decreased α-ketoglutarate and increased succinate levels, suggesting inhibition of electron transport chain complex II. In vitro modeling confirmed inhibition of complex II via reduced glutathionylation of succinate dehydrogenase. These metabolic perturbations suppress oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), which efficiently and selectively targets LSCs. Our findings show for the first time that a therapeutic intervention can eradicate LSCs in patients with AML by disrupting the metabolic machinery driving energy metabolism, resulting in promising clinical activity in a patient population with historically poor outcomes.	20	GSE116481	Homo sapiens	3968	52MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (Ovarian or fallopian tube carcinoma)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	20	GSE154763_OV_FTC	Homo sapiens	3888	151MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Integrating microarray-based spatial transcriptomics and single-cell RNA-seq reveals tissue architecture in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC_A and PDAC_B)	Reuben Moncada, Dalia Barkley, [] Itai Yanai	Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) enables the systematic identification of cell populations in a tissue, but characterizing their spatial organization remains challenging. We combine a microarray-based spatial transcriptomics method that reveals spatial patterns of gene expression using an array of spots, each capturing the transcriptomes of multiple adjacent cells, with scRNA-Seq generated from the same sample. To annotate the precise cellular composition of distinct tissue regions, we introduce a method for multimodal intersection analysis. Applying multimodal intersection analysis to primary pancreatic tumors, we find that subpopulations of ductal cells, macrophages, dendritic cells and cancer cells have spatially restricted enrichments, as well as distinct coenrichments with other cell types. Furthermore, we identify colocalization of inflammatory fibroblasts and cancer cells expressing a stress-response gene module. Our approach for mapping the architecture of scRNA-seq-defined subpopulations can be applied to reveal the interactions inherent to complex tissues.	20	GSE111672	Homo sapiens	3659	61MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of infiltrating neoplastic cells at the migrating front of human glioblastoma	Spyros Darmanis, Steven A. Sloan, [] Stephen R. Quake	Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary brain cancer in adults and is notoriously difficult to treat because of its diffuse nature. We performed single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on 3,589 cells in a cohort of four patients. We obtained cells from the tumor core as well as surrounding peripheral tissue. Our analysis revealed cellular variation in the tumor’s genome and transcriptome. We were also able to identify infiltrating neoplastic cells in regions peripheral to the core lesions. Despite the existence of significant heterogeneity among neoplastic cells, we found that infiltrating GBM cells share a consistent gene signature between patients, suggesting a common mechanism of infiltration. Additionally, in investigating the immunological response to the tumors, we found transcriptionally distinct myeloid cell populations residing in the tumor core and the surrounding peritumoral space. Our data provide a detailed dissection of GBM cell types, revealing an abundance of information about tumor formation and migration.	20	GSE84465	Homo sapiens	3589	146MB	RNA	Raw count
Comparative Analysis and Refinement of Human PSC-Derived Kidney Organoid Differentiation with Single-Cell Transcriptomics (K252a-treated organoids - BDNF inhibitor)	Haojia Wu, Kohei Uchimura, [] Benjamin D. Humphreys	Kidney organoids derived from human pluripotent stem cells have great utility for investigating organogenesis and disease mechanisms and, potentially, as a replacement tissue source, but how closely organoids derived from current protocols replicate adult human kidney is undefined. We compared two directed differentiation protocols by single-cell transcriptomics of 83,130 cells from 65 organoids with single-cell transcriptomes of fetal and adult kidney cells. Both protocols generate a diverse range of kidney cells with differing ratios, but organoid-derived cell types are immature, and 10%-20% of cells are non-renal. Reconstructing lineage relationships by pseudotemporal ordering identified ligands, receptors, and transcription factor networks associated with fate decisions. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its cognate receptor NTRK2 were expressed in the neuronal lineage during organoid differentiation. Inhibiting this pathway improved organoid formation by reducing neurons by 90% without affecting kidney differentiation, highlighting the power of single-cell technologies to characterize and improve organoid differentiation.	20	GSE118184_bdnf_inhibitor	Homo sapiens	3314	54MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the human retina identifies cell types associated with age-related macular degeneration (Seq-Well)	Menon, Madhvi and Mohammadi, [] Manolis and others	Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified genetic variants associated with age-related macular degeneration (AMD), one of the leading causes of blindness in the elderly. However, it has been challenging to identify the cell types associated with AMD given the genetic complexity of the disease. Here we perform massively parallel single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of human retinas using two independent platforms, and report the first single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the human retina. Using a multi-resolution network-based analysis, we identify all major retinal cell types, and their corresponding gene expression signatures. Heterogeneity is observed within macroglia, suggesting that human retinal glia are more diverse than previously thought. Finally, GWAS-based enrichment analysis identifies glia, vascular cells, and cone photoreceptors to be associated with the risk of AMD. These data provide a detailed analysis of the human retina, and show how scRNA-seq can provide insight into cell types involved in complex, inflammatory genetic diseases.	20	GSE137846	Homo sapiens	3248	66MB	RNA	Raw count
Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment (10X - Neutrophils)	Jonas Schulte-Schrepping, Nico Reusch, [] Leif Erik Sander	Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a mild to moderate respiratory tract infection, however, a subset of patients progress to severe disease and respiratory failure. The mechanism of protective immunity in mild forms and the pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 associated with increased neutrophil counts and dysregulated immune responses remain unclear. In a dual-center, two-cohort study, we combined single-cell RNA-sequencing and single-cell proteomics of whole-blood and peripheral-blood mononuclear cells to determine changes in immune cell composition and activation in mild versus severe COVID-19 (242 samples from 109 individuals) over time. HLA-DRhiCD11chi inflammatory monocytes with an interferon-stimulated gene signature were elevated in mild COVID-19. Severe COVID-19 was marked by occurrence of neutrophil precursors, as evidence of emergency myelopoiesis, dysfunctional mature neutrophils, and HLA-DRlo monocytes. Our study provides detailed insights into the systemic immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and reveals profound alterations in the myeloid cell compartment associated with severe COVID-19.	20	jonas_et_al_2020_10x_neutrophil	Homo sapiens	3154	30MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Dendritic cell)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	20	Qian_et_al_2020_DC	Homo sapiens	3084	100MB	RNA	Raw count
A Single-Cell Transcriptome Atlas of the Human Pancreas	Mauro J. Muraro, Gitanjali Dharmadhikari, [] Alexander van Oudenaarden	To understand organ function, it is important to have an inventory of its cell types and of their corresponding marker genes. This is a particularly challenging task for human tissues like the pancreas, because reliable markers are limited. Hence, transcriptome-wide studies are typically done on pooled islets of Langerhans, obscuring contributions from rare cell types and of potential subpopulations. To overcome this challenge, we developed an automated platform that uses FACS, robotics, and the CEL-Seq2 protocol to obtain the transcriptomes of thousands of single pancreatic cells from deceased organ donors, allowing in silico purification of all main pancreatic cell types. We identify cell type-specific transcription factors and a subpopulation of REG3A-positive acinar cells. We also show that CD24 and TM4SF4 expression can be used to sort live alpha and beta cells with high purity. This resource will be useful for developing a deeper understanding of pancreatic biology and pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus.	20	GSE85241	Homo sapiens	3072	123MB	RNA	Raw count
Neuronal subtypes and diversity revealed by single-nucleus RNA sequencing of the human brain	Blue B. Lake, Rizi Ai, [] Kun Zhang	The human brain has enormously complex cellular diversity and connectivities fundamental to our neural functions, yet difficulties in interrogating individual neurons has impeded understanding of the underlying transcriptional landscape. We developed a scalable approach to sequence and quantify RNA molecules in isolated neuronal nuclei from a postmortem brain, generating 3227 sets of single-neuron data from six distinct regions of the cerebral cortex. Using an iterative clustering and classification approach, we identified 16 neuronal subtypes that were further annotated on the basis of known markers and cortical cytoarchitecture. These data demonstrate a robust and scalable method for identifying and categorizing single nuclear transcriptomes, revealing shared genes sufficient to distinguish previously unknown and orthologous neuronal subtypes as well as regional identity and transcriptomic heterogeneity within the human brain.	20	lake2016	Homo sapiens	3042	572MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A single-cell atlas of the airway epithelium reveals the CFTR-rich pulmonary ionocyte (air-liquid interface cultured)	Lindsey W. Plasschaert, Rapolas Žilionis, [] and Aron B. Jaffe	The functions of epithelial tissues are dictated by the types, abundance and distribution of the differentiated cells they contain. Attempts to restore tissue function after damage require knowledge of how physiological tasks are distributed among cell types, and how cell states vary between homeostasis, injury–repair and disease. In the conducting airway, a heterogeneous basal cell population gives rise to specialized luminal cells that perform mucociliary clearance1. Here we perform single-cell profiling of human bronchial epithelial cells and mouse tracheal epithelial cells to obtain a comprehensive census of cell types in the conducting airway and their behaviour in homeostasis and regeneration. Our analysis reveals cell states that represent known and novel cell populations, delineates their heterogeneity and identifies distinct differentiation trajectories during homeostasis and tissue repair. Finally, we identified a novel, rare cell type that we call the ‘pulmonary ionocyte’, which co-expresses FOXI1, multiple subunits of the vacuolar-type H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) and CFTR, the gene that is mutated in cystic fibrosis. Using immunofluorescence, modulation of signalling pathways and electrophysiology, we show that Notch signalling is necessary and FOXI1 expression is sufficient to drive the production of the pulmonary ionocyte, and that the pulmonary ionocyte is a major source of CFTR activity in the conducting airway epithelium.	20	GSE102580_human_cultured	Homo sapiens	2970	125MB	RNA	Log-normalized
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (Pancreatic adenocarcinoma)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	10	GSE154763_PAAD	Homo sapiens	2853	95MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single-cell immune landscape of human atherosclerotic plaques (CITE-seq - T cells - Macrophages)	Dawn M. Fernandez, Adeeb H. Rahman, [] Chiara Giannarelli	Atherosclerosis is driven by multifaceted contributions of the immune system within the circulation and at vascular focal sites. However, specific characteristics of dysregulated immune cells within atherosclerotic lesions that lead to clinical events such as ischemic stroke or myocardial infarction are poorly understood. Here, using single-cell proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, we uncovered distinct features of both T cells and macrophages in carotid artery plaques of patients with clinically symptomatic disease (recent stroke or transient ischemic attack) compared to asymptomatic disease (no recent stroke). Plaques from symptomatic patients were characterized by a distinct subset of CD4+ T cells and by T cells that were activated and differentiated. Moreover, some T cell subsets in these plaques presented markers of T cell exhaustion. Additionally, macrophages from these plaques contained alternatively activated phenotypes, including subsets associated with plaque vulnerability. In plaques from asymptomatic patients, T cells and macrophages were activated and displayed evidence of interleukin-1β signaling. The identification of specific features of innate and adaptive immune cells in plaques that are associated with cerebrovascular events may enable the design of more precisely tailored cardiovascular immunotherapies.	20	fernandez_et_al_2019_citeseq	Homo sapiens	2842	45MB	RNA, ADT	Log-normalized
The immune cell landscape in kidneys of patients with lupus nephritis	Arnon Arazi, Deepak A. Rao, [] the Accelerating Medicines Partnership in SLE network	Lupus nephritis is a potentially fatal autoimmune disease for which the current treatment is ineffective and often toxic. To develop mechanistic hypotheses of disease, we analyzed kidney samples from patients with lupus nephritis and from healthy control subjects using single-cell RNA sequencing. Our analysis revealed 21 subsets of leukocytes active in disease, including multiple populations of myeloid cells, T cells, natural killer cells and B cells that demonstrated both pro-inflammatory responses and inflammation-resolving responses. We found evidence of local activation of B cells correlated with an age-associated B-cell signature and evidence of progressive stages of monocyte differentiation within the kidney. A clear interferon response was observed in most cells. Two chemokine receptors, CXCR4 and CX3CR1, were broadly expressed, implying a potentially central role in cell trafficking. Gene expression of immune cells in urine and kidney was highly correlated, which would suggest that urine might serve as a surrogate for kidney biopsies.	20	SDY997_landscape	Homo sapiens	2838	99MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Human germinal center transcriptional programs are de-synchronized in B cell lymphoma	Pierre Milpied, Iñaki Cervera-Marzal1, [] Lionel Spinelli  1 and Bertrand Nadel	Most adult B cell lymphomas originate from germinal center (GC) B cells, but it is unclear to what extent B cells in overt lymphoma retain the functional dynamics of GC B cells or are blocked at a particular stage of the GC reaction. Here we used integrative single-cell analysis of phenotype, gene expression and variable-region sequence of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus to track the characteristic human GC B cell program in follicular lymphoma B cells. By modeling the cyclic continuum of GC B cell transitional states, we identified characteristic patterns of synchronously expressed gene clusters. GC-specific geneexpression synchrony was lost in single lymphoma B cells. However, distinct follicular lymphoma–specific cell states co-existed within single patient biopsies. Our data show that lymphoma B cells are not blocked in a GC B cell state but might adopt new dynamic modes of functional diversity, which opens the possibility of novel definitions of lymphoma identity.	20	GSE115795	Homo sapiens	2707	56MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Complement Signals Determine Opposite Effects of B Cells in Chemotherapy-Induced Immunity	Lu, Yiwen and Zhao, [] Yingying and others	Understanding molecular mechanisms that dictate B cell diversity is important for targeting B cells as anti-cancer treatment. Through the single-cell dissection of B cell heterogeneity in longitudinal samples of patients with breast cancer before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, we revealed that an ICOSL + B cell subset emerges after chemotherapy. Using three immunocompetent mouse models, we recapitulated the subset switch of human tumor-infiltrating B cells during chemotherapy. By employing B-cell-specific deletion mice, we showed that ICOSL in B cells boosts anti-tumor immunity by enhancing the effector to regulatory T cell ratio. The signature of ICOSL + B cells is imprinted by complement-CR2 signaling, which is triggered by immunogenic cell death. Moreover, we identified that CD55, a complement inhibitory protein, determines the opposite roles of B cells in chemotherapy. Collectively, we demonstrated a critical role of the B cell subset switch in chemotherapy response, which has implications in designing novel anti-cancer therapies.	20	GSE135710_human	Homo sapiens	2700	136MB	RNA	Raw count
Dissecting the transcriptome landscape of the human fetal neural retina and retinal pigment epithelium by single-cell RNA-seq analysis	Yuqiong Hu, Xiaoye Wang, [] Fuchou Tang	The developmental pathway of the neural retina (NR) and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) has been revealed by extensive research in mice. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of the human NR and RPE, as well as the interactions between these two tissues, have not been well defined. Here, we analyzed 2,421 individual cells from human fetal NR and RPE using single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) technique and revealed the tightly regulated spatiotemporal gene expression network of human retinal cells. We identified major cell classes of human fetal retina and potential crucial transcription factors for each cell class. We dissected the dynamic expression patterns of visual cycle– and ligand-receptor interaction–related genes in the RPE and NR. Moreover, we provided a map of disease-related genes for human fetal retinal cells and highlighted the importance of retinal progenitor cells as potential targets of inherited retinal diseases. Our findings captured the key in vivo features of the development of the human NR and RPE and offered insightful clues for further functional studies.	20	GSE107618	Homo sapiens	2467	212MB	RNA	TPM
A single-cell map of intratumoral changes during anti-PD1 treatment of patients with breast cancer (Cohort 1 - Dendritic cell)	Ayse Bassez, Hanne Vos, [] Diether Lambrechts	Immune-checkpoint blockade (ICB) combined with neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves pathological complete response in breast cancer. To understand why only a subset of tumors respond to ICB, patients with hormone receptor-positive or triple-negative breast cancer were treated with anti-PD1 before surgery. Paired pre- versus on-treatment biopsies from treatment-naive patients receiving anti-PD1 (n = 29) or patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy before anti-PD1 (n = 11) were subjected to single-cell transcriptome, T cell receptor and proteome profiling. One-third of tumors contained PD1-expressing T cells, which clonally expanded upon anti-PD1 treatment, irrespective of tumor subtype. Expansion mainly involved CD8+ T cells with pronounced expression of cytotoxic-activity (PRF1, GZMB), immune-cell homing (CXCL13) and exhaustion markers (HAVCR2, LAG3), and CD4+ T cells characterized by expression of T-helper-1 (IFNG) and follicular-helper (BCL6, CXCR5) markers. In pre-treatment biopsies, the relative frequency of immunoregulatory dendritic cells (PD-L1+), specific macrophage phenotypes (CCR2+ or MMP9+) and cancer cells exhibiting major histocompatibility complex class I/II expression correlated positively with T cell expansion. Conversely, undifferentiated pre-effector/memory T cells (TCF7+, GZMK+) or inhibitory macrophages (CX3CR1+, C3+) were inversely correlated with T cell expansion. Collectively, our data identify various immunophenotypes and associated gene sets that are positively or negatively correlated with T cell expansion following anti-PD1 treatment. We shed light on the heterogeneity in treatment response to anti-PD1 in breast cancer.	20	ayse_et_al_2021_cohort1_dc	Homo sapiens	2410	57MB	RNA	Raw count
A single-cell RNA-seq survey of the developmental landscape of the human prefrontal cortex	Suijuan Zhong, Shu Zhang, [] Na Pan	The mammalian prefrontal cortex comprises a set of highly specialized brain areas containing billions of cells and serves as the centre of the highest-order cognitive functions, such as memory, cognitive ability, decision-making and social behaviour1,2. Although neural circuits are formed in the late stages of human embryonic development and even after birth, diverse classes of functional cells are generated and migrate to the appropriate locations earlier in development. Dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex contributes to cognitive deficits and the majority of neurodevelopmental disorders; there is therefore a need for detailed knowledge of the development of the prefrontal cortex. However, it is still difficult to identify cell types in the developing human prefrontal cortex and to distinguish their developmental features. Here we analyse more than 2,300 single cells in the developing human prefrontal cortex from gestational weeks 8 to 26 using RNA sequencing. We identify 35 subtypes of cells in six main classes and trace the developmental trajectories of these cells. Detailed analysis of neural progenitor cells highlights new marker genes and unique developmental features of intermediate progenitor cells. We also map the timeline of neurogenesis of excitatory neurons in the prefrontal cortex and detect the presence of interneuron progenitors in early developing prefrontal cortex. Moreover, we reveal the intrinsic development-dependent signals that regulate neuron generation and circuit formation using single-cell transcriptomic data analysis. Our screening and characterization approach provides a blueprint for understanding the development of the human prefrontal cortex in the early and mid-gestational stages in order to systematically dissect the cellular basis and molecular regulation of prefrontal cortex function in humans.	20	GSE104276	Homo sapiens	2394	229MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human blood dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors	Alexandra-Chloé Villani, Rahul Satija, [] Nir Hacohen	Dendritic cells (DCs) and monocytes play a central role in pathogen sensing, phagocytosis, and antigen presentation and consist of multiple specialized subtypes. However, their identities and interrelationships are not fully understood. Using unbiased single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of ~2400 cells, we identified six human DCs and four monocyte subtypes in human blood. Our study reveals a new DC subset that shares properties with plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) but potently activates T cells, thus redefining pDCs; a new subdivision within the CD1C+ subset of DCs; the relationship between blastic plasmacytoid DC neoplasia cells and healthy DCs; and circulating progenitor of conventional DCs (cDCs). Our revised taxonomy will enable more accurate functional and developmental analyses as well as immune monitoring in health and disease.	10	GSE94820	Homo sapiens	2384	151MB	RNA	TPM
Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of mouse and human microglia at single-cell resolution	Takahiro Masuda, Roman Sankowski, [] Marco Prinz	Microglia have critical roles not only in neural development and homeostasis, but also in neurodegenerative and neuroinflammatory diseases of the central nervous system. These highly diverse and specialized functions may be executed by subsets of microglia that already exist in situ, or by specific subsets of microglia that develop from a homogeneous pool of cells on demand. However, little is known about the presence of spatially and temporally restricted subclasses of microglia in the central nervous system during development or disease. Here we combine massively parallel singlecell analysis, single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization, advanced immunohistochemistry and computational modelling to comprehensively characterize subclasses of microglia in multiple regions of the central nervous system during development and disease. Single-cell analysis of tissues of the central nervous system during homeostasis in mice revealed specific time- and region-dependent subtypes of microglia. Demyelinating and neurodegenerative diseases evoked context-dependent subtypes of microglia with distinct molecular hallmarks and diverse cellular kinetics. Corresponding clusters of microglia were also identified in healthy human brains, and the brains of patients with multiple sclerosis. Our data provide insights into the endogenous immune system of the central nervous system during development, homeostasis and disease, and may also provide new targets for the treatment of neurodegenerative and neuroinflammatory pathologies.	20	GSE124335	Homo sapiens	2380	54MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell Transcriptome Profiling of Human Pancreatic Islets in Health and Type 2 Diabetes	Asa Segerstolpe, Athanasia Palasantza, [] and Rickard Sandberg.	Hormone-secreting cells within pancreatic islets of Langerhans play important roles in metabolic homeostasis and disease. However, their transcriptional characterization is still incomplete. Here, we sequenced the transcriptomes of thousands of human islet cells from healthy and type 2 diabetic donors. We could define specific genetic programs for each individual endocrine and exocrine cell type, even for rare δ, γ, ε, and stellate cells, and revealed subpopulations of α, β, and acinar cells. Intriguingly, δ cells expressed several important receptors, indicating an unrecognized importance of these cells in integrating paracrine and systemic metabolic signals. Genes previously associated with obesity or diabetes were found to correlate with BMI. Finally, comparing healthy and T2D transcriptomes in a cell-type resolved manner uncovered candidates for future functional studies. Altogether, our analyses demonstrate the utility of the generated single-cell gene expression resource.	20	E_MTAB_5061	Homo sapiens	2209	190MB	RNA	Raw count
Molecular Diversity of Midbrain Development in Mouse, Human, and Stem Cells (Human - Embryo)	Gioele La Manno, Daniel Gyllborg, [] Sten Linnarsson	Understanding human embryonic ventral midbrain is of major interest for Parkinson's disease. However, the cell types, their gene expression dynamics, and their relationship to commonly used rodent models remain to be defined. We performed single-cell RNA sequencing to examine ventral midbrain development in human and mouse. We found 25 molecularly defined human cell types, including five subtypes of radial glia-like cells and four progenitors. In the mouse, two mature fetal dopaminergic neuron subtypes diversified into five adult classes during postnatal development. Cell types and gene expression were generally conserved across species, but with clear differences in cell proliferation, developmental timing, and dopaminergic neuron development. Additionally, we developed a method to quantitatively assess the fidelity of dopaminergic neurons derived from human pluripotent stem cells, at a single-cell level. Thus, our study provides insight into the molecular programs controlling human midbrain development and provides a foundation for the development of cell replacement therapies.	10	GSE76381_human_embryo	Homo sapiens	1977	51MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer blueprint of the heterogeneous tumor microenvironment revealed by single-cell profiling (Mast cell)	Junbin Qian, Siel Olbrecht, [] Sabine Tejpar & Diether Lambrechts	The stromal compartment of the tumor microenvironment consists of a heterogeneous set of tissue-resident and tumor-infiltrating cells, which are profoundly moulded by cancer cells. An outstanding question is to what extent this heterogeneity is similar between cancers affecting different organs. Here, we profile 233,591 single cells from patients with lung, colorectal, ovary and breast cancer (n = 36) and construct a pan-cancer blueprint of stromal cell heterogeneity using different single-cell RNA and protein-based technologies. We identify 68 stromal cell populations, of which 46 are shared between cancer types and 22 are unique. We also characterise each population phenotypically by highlighting its marker genes, transcription factors, metabolic activities and tissue-specific expression differences. Resident cell types are characterised by substantial tissue specificity, while tumor-infiltrating cell types are largely shared across cancer types. Finally, by applying the blueprint to melanoma tumors treated with checkpoint immunotherapy and identifying a naïve CD4+ T-cell phenotype predictive of response to checkpoint immunotherapy, we illustrate how it can serve as a guide to interpret scRNA-seq data. In conclusion, by providing a comprehensive blueprint through an interactive web server, we generate the first panoramic view on the shared complexity of stromal cells in different cancers.	10	Qian_et_al_2020_Mast	Homo sapiens	1962	22MB	RNA	Raw count
Integrating microarray-based spatial transcriptomics and single-cell RNA-seq reveals tissue architecture in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC_A)	Reuben Moncada, Dalia Barkley, [] Itai Yanai	Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) enables the systematic identification of cell populations in a tissue, but characterizing their spatial organization remains challenging. We combine a microarray-based spatial transcriptomics method that reveals spatial patterns of gene expression using an array of spots, each capturing the transcriptomes of multiple adjacent cells, with scRNA-Seq generated from the same sample. To annotate the precise cellular composition of distinct tissue regions, we introduce a method for multimodal intersection analysis. Applying multimodal intersection analysis to primary pancreatic tumors, we find that subpopulations of ductal cells, macrophages, dendritic cells and cancer cells have spatially restricted enrichments, as well as distinct coenrichments with other cell types. Furthermore, we identify colocalization of inflammatory fibroblasts and cancer cells expressing a stress-response gene module. Our approach for mapping the architecture of scRNA-seq-defined subpopulations can be applied to reveal the interactions inherent to complex tissues.	10	GSE111672_A	Homo sapiens	1926	33MB	RNA	Raw count
Innate Immune Landscape in Early Lung Adenocarcinoma by Paired Single-Cell Analyses	Lavin, Yonit and Kobayashi, [] Jacob H and others	To guide the design of immunotherapy strategies for patients with early stage lung tumors, we developed a multiscale immune profiling strategy to map the immune landscape of early lung adenocarcinoma lesions to search for tumor-driven immune changes. Utilizing a barcoding method that allows a simultaneous single-cell analysis of the tumor, non-involved lung, and blood cells, we provide a detailed immune cell atlas of early lung tumors. We show that stage I lung adenocarcinoma lesions already harbor significantly altered T cell and NK cell compartments. Moreover, we identified changes in tumor-infiltrating myeloid cell (TIM) subsets that likely compromise anti-tumor T cell immunity. Paired single-cell analyses thus offer valuable knowledge of tumor-driven immune changes, providing a powerful tool for the rational design of immune therapies.	10	GSE97168	Homo sapiens	1920	11MB	RNA	Raw count
Mapping microglia states in the human brain through the integration of high-dimensional techniques (glioma-associated microglia)	Roman Sankowski, Chotima Bottcher, [] Marco Prinz	Microglia are tissue-resident macrophages of the CNS that orchestrate local immune responses and contribute to several neurological and psychiatric diseases. Little is known about human microglia and how they orchestrate their highly plastic, context-specific adaptive responses during pathology. Here we combined two high-dimensional technologies, single-cell RNA-sequencing and time-of-flight mass cytometry, to identify microglia states in the human brain during homeostasis and disease. This approach enabled us to identify and characterize a previously unappreciated spectrum of transcriptional states in human microglia. These transcriptional states are determined by their spatial distribution, and they further change with aging and brain tumor pathology. This description of multiple microglia phenotypes in the human CNS may open promising new avenues for subset-specific therapeutic interventions.	10	GSE135437_gbm	Homo sapiens	1853	40MB	RNA	Read count
Integrating microarray-based spatial transcriptomics and single-cell RNA-seq reveals tissue architecture in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC_B)	Reuben Moncada, Dalia Barkley, [] Itai Yanai	Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) enables the systematic identification of cell populations in a tissue, but characterizing their spatial organization remains challenging. We combine a microarray-based spatial transcriptomics method that reveals spatial patterns of gene expression using an array of spots, each capturing the transcriptomes of multiple adjacent cells, with scRNA-Seq generated from the same sample. To annotate the precise cellular composition of distinct tissue regions, we introduce a method for multimodal intersection analysis. Applying multimodal intersection analysis to primary pancreatic tumors, we find that subpopulations of ductal cells, macrophages, dendritic cells and cancer cells have spatially restricted enrichments, as well as distinct coenrichments with other cell types. Furthermore, we identify colocalization of inflammatory fibroblasts and cancer cells expressing a stress-response gene module. Our approach for mapping the architecture of scRNA-seq-defined subpopulations can be applied to reveal the interactions inherent to complex tissues.	10	GSE111672_B	Homo sapiens	1733	25MB	RNA	Raw count
Molecular Diversity of Midbrain Development in Mouse, Human, and Stem Cells (Human - Embryonic stem cell)	Gioele La Manno, Daniel Gyllborg, [] Sten Linnarsson	Understanding human embryonic ventral midbrain is of major interest for Parkinson's disease. However, the cell types, their gene expression dynamics, and their relationship to commonly used rodent models remain to be defined. We performed single-cell RNA sequencing to examine ventral midbrain development in human and mouse. We found 25 molecularly defined human cell types, including five subtypes of radial glia-like cells and four progenitors. In the mouse, two mature fetal dopaminergic neuron subtypes diversified into five adult classes during postnatal development. Cell types and gene expression were generally conserved across species, but with clear differences in cell proliferation, developmental timing, and dopaminergic neuron development. Additionally, we developed a method to quantitatively assess the fidelity of dopaminergic neurons derived from human pluripotent stem cells, at a single-cell level. Thus, our study provides insight into the molecular programs controlling human midbrain development and provides a foundation for the development of cell replacement therapies.	10	GSE76381_ES	Homo sapiens	1715	68MB	RNA	Raw count
Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor microenvironment (alveolar cells)	Diether Lambrechts, Els Wauters, [] Bernard Thienpont	Cancer cells are embedded in the tumor microenvironment (TME), a complex ecosystem of stromal cells. Here, we present a 52,698-cell catalog of the TME transcriptome in human lung tumors at single-cell resolution, validated in independent samples where 40,250 additional cells were sequenced. By comparing with matching non-malignant lung samples, we reveal a highly complex TME that profoundly molds stromal cells. We identify 52 stromal cell subtypes, including novel subpopulations in cell types hitherto considered to be homogeneous, as well as transcription factors underlying their heterogeneity. For instance, we discover fibroblasts expressing different collagen sets, endothelial cells downregulating immune cell homing and genes coregulated with established immune checkpoint transcripts and correlating with T-cell activity. By assessing marker genes for these cell subtypes in bulk RNA-sequencing data from 1,572 patients, we illustrate how these correlate with survival, while immunohistochemistry for selected markers validates them as separate cellular entities in an independent series of lung tumors. Hence, in providing a comprehensive catalog of stromal cells types and by characterizing their phenotype and co-optive behavior, this resource provides deeper insights into lung cancer biology that will be helpful in advancing lung cancer diagnosis and therapy.	10	E-MTAB-6149_alveolar	Homo sapiens	1706	49MB	RNA	Raw count
Construction of a human cell landscape at single-cell level (Other)	Xiaoping Han, Ziming Zhou, [] Dan Zhang & Guoji Guo	Single-cell analysis is a valuable tool for dissecting cellular heterogeneity in complex systems1. However, a comprehensive single-cell atlas has not been achieved for humans. Here we use single-cell mRNA sequencing to determine the cell-type composition of all major human organs and construct a scheme for the human cell landscape (HCL). We have uncovered a single-cell hierarchy for many tissues that have not been well characterized. We established a ‘single-cell HCL analysis’ pipeline that helps to define human cell identity. Finally, we performed a single-cell comparative analysis of landscapes from human and mouse to identify conserved genetic networks. We found that stem and progenitor cells exhibit strong transcriptomic stochasticity, whereas differentiated cells are more distinct. Our results provide a useful resource for the study of human biology.	10	GSE134355_other	Homo sapiens	1660	9MB	RNA	Raw count
Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor microenvironment (endothelial cells)	Diether Lambrechts, Els Wauters, [] Bernard Thienpont	Cancer cells are embedded in the tumor microenvironment (TME), a complex ecosystem of stromal cells. Here, we present a 52,698-cell catalog of the TME transcriptome in human lung tumors at single-cell resolution, validated in independent samples where 40,250 additional cells were sequenced. By comparing with matching non-malignant lung samples, we reveal a highly complex TME that profoundly molds stromal cells. We identify 52 stromal cell subtypes, including novel subpopulations in cell types hitherto considered to be homogeneous, as well as transcription factors underlying their heterogeneity. For instance, we discover fibroblasts expressing different collagen sets, endothelial cells downregulating immune cell homing and genes coregulated with established immune checkpoint transcripts and correlating with T-cell activity. By assessing marker genes for these cell subtypes in bulk RNA-sequencing data from 1,572 patients, we illustrate how these correlate with survival, while immunohistochemistry for selected markers validates them as separate cellular entities in an independent series of lung tumors. Hence, in providing a comprehensive catalog of stromal cells types and by characterizing their phenotype and co-optive behavior, this resource provides deeper insights into lung cancer biology that will be helpful in advancing lung cancer diagnosis and therapy.	10	E-MTAB-6149_endothelial	Homo sapiens	1592	34MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of human lung provides insights into the pathobiology of pulmonary fibrosis (cryobiopsy)	Paul A. Reyfman, James M. Walter, [] Alexander V. Misharin	Rationale: The contributions of diverse cell populations in the human lung to pulmonary fibrosis pathogenesis are poorly understood. Single-cell RNA sequencing can reveal changes within individual cell populations during pulmonary fibrosis that are important for disease pathogenesis. Objectives: To determine whether single-cell RNA sequencing can reveal disease-related heterogeneity within alveolar macrophages, epithelial cells, or other cell types in lung tissue from subjects with pulmonary fibrosis compared with control subjects. Methods: We performed single-cell RNA sequencing on lung tissue obtained from eight transplant donors and eight recipients with pulmonary fibrosis and on one bronchoscopic cryobiospy sample from a patient with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. We validated these data using in situ RNA hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and bulk RNA-sequencing on flow-sorted cells from 22 additional subjects. Measurements and Main Results: We identified a distinct, novel population of profibrotic alveolar macrophages exclusively in patients with fibrosis. Within epithelial cells, the expression of genes involved in Wnt secretion and response was restricted to nonoverlapping cells. We identified rare cell populations including airway stem cells and senescent cells emerging during pulmonary fibrosis. We developed a web-based tool to explore these data. Conclusions: We generated a single-cell atlas of pulmonary fibrosis. Using this atlas, we demonstrated heterogeneity within alveolar macrophages and epithelial cells from subjects with pulmonary fibrosis. These results support the feasibility of discovery-based approaches using next-generation sequencing technologies to identify signaling pathways for targeting in the development of personalized therapies for patients with pulmonary fibrosis.	10	GSE121611_cryobiopsy	Homo sapiens	1516	27MB	RNA	Raw count
Differentiation and maturation of oligodendrocytes in human three-dimensional neural cultures	Rebecca M. Marton, Yuki Miura, [] Sergiu P. Pașca	Investigating human oligodendrogenesis and the interaction of oligodendrocytes with neurons and astrocytes would accelerate our understanding of the mechanisms underlying white matter disorders. However, this is challenging because of the limited accessibility of functional human brain tissue. Here, we developed a new differentiation method of human induced pluripotent stem cells to generate three-dimensional brain organoids that contain oligodendrocytes as well as neurons and astrocytes, called human oligodendrocyte spheroids. We found that oligodendrocyte lineage cells derived in human oligodendrocyte spheroids transitioned through developmental stages similar to primary human oligodendrocytes and that the migration of oligodendrocyte lineage cells and their susceptibility to lysolecithin exposure could be captured by live imaging. Moreover, their morphology changed as they matured over time in vitro and started myelinating neurons. We anticipate that this method can be used to study oligodendrocyte development, myelination, and interactions with other major cell types in the CNS.	10	GSE115011	Homo sapiens	1471	78MB	RNA	Raw count
Phenotype molding of stromal cells in the lung tumor microenvironment (fibroblasts)	Diether Lambrechts, Els Wauters, [] Bernard Thienpont	Cancer cells are embedded in the tumor microenvironment (TME), a complex ecosystem of stromal cells. Here, we present a 52,698-cell catalog of the TME transcriptome in human lung tumors at single-cell resolution, validated in independent samples where 40,250 additional cells were sequenced. By comparing with matching non-malignant lung samples, we reveal a highly complex TME that profoundly molds stromal cells. We identify 52 stromal cell subtypes, including novel subpopulations in cell types hitherto considered to be homogeneous, as well as transcription factors underlying their heterogeneity. For instance, we discover fibroblasts expressing different collagen sets, endothelial cells downregulating immune cell homing and genes coregulated with established immune checkpoint transcripts and correlating with T-cell activity. By assessing marker genes for these cell subtypes in bulk RNA-sequencing data from 1,572 patients, we illustrate how these correlate with survival, while immunohistochemistry for selected markers validates them as separate cellular entities in an independent series of lung tumors. Hence, in providing a comprehensive catalog of stromal cells types and by characterizing their phenotype and co-optive behavior, this resource provides deeper insights into lung cancer biology that will be helpful in advancing lung cancer diagnosis and therapy.	10	E-MTAB-6149_fibroblasts	Homo sapiens	1460	39MB	RNA	Raw count
Reconstructed Single-Cell Fate Trajectories Define Lineage Plasticity Windows during Differentiation of Human PSC-Derived Distal Lung Progenitors (Long-term culture of alveolospheres)	Killian Hurley, Jun Ding, [] Darrell N Kotton	Alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (AEC2s) are the facultative progenitors responsible for maintaining lung alveoli throughout life but are difficult to isolate from patients. Here, we engineer AEC2s from human pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) in vitro and use time-series single-cell RNA sequencing with lentiviral barcoding to profile the kinetics of their differentiation in comparison to primary fetal and adult AEC2 benchmarks. We observe bifurcating cell-fate trajectories as primordial lung progenitors differentiate in vitro, with some progeny reaching their AEC2 fate target, while others diverge to alternative non-lung endodermal fates. We develop a Continuous State Hidden Markov model to identify the timing and type of signals, such as overexuberant Wnt responses, that induce some early multipotent NKX2-1+ progenitors to lose lung fate. Finally, we find that this initial developmental plasticity is regulatable and subsides over time, ultimately resulting in PSC-derived AEC2s that exhibit a stable phenotype and nearly limitless self-renewal capacity.	10	hurley_et_al_2020_alveolospheres	Homo sapiens	1390	48MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Longitudinal single-cell RNA sequencing of patient-derived primary cells reveals drug-induced infidelity in stem cell hierarchy	Ankur Sharma, Elaine Yiqun Cao, [] Ramanuj DasGupta	Chemo-resistance is one of the major causes of cancer-related deaths. Here we used single-cell transcriptomics to investigate divergent modes of chemo-resistance in tumor cells. We observed that higher degree of phenotypic intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) favors selection of pre-existing drug-resistant cells, whereas phenotypically homogeneous cells engage covert epigenetic mechanisms to trans-differentiate under drug-selection. This adaptation was driven by selection-induced gain of H3K27ac marks on bivalently poised resistance-associated chromatin, and therefore not expressed in the treatment-naïve setting. Mechanistic interrogation of this phenomenon revealed that drug-induced adaptation was acquired upon the loss of stem factor SOX2, and a concomitant gain of SOX9. Strikingly we observed an enrichment of SOX9 at drug-induced H3K27ac sites, suggesting that tumor evolution could be driven by stem cell-switch-mediated epigenetic plasticity. Importantly, JQ1 mediated inhibition of BRD4 could reverse drug-induced adaptation. These results provide mechanistic insights into the modes of therapy-induced cellular plasticity and underscore the use of epigenetic inhibitors in targeting tumor evolution.	10	GSE117872	Homo sapiens	1302	489MB	RNA	TPM
A single-cell landscape of high-grade serous ovarian cancer (Smart-Seq2)	Benjamin Izar, Itay Tirosh, [] Aviv Regev	Malignant abdominal fluid (ascites) frequently develops in women with advanced high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) and is associated with drug resistance and a poor prognosis1. To comprehensively characterize the HGSOC ascites ecosystem, we used single-cell RNA sequencing to profile ~11,000 cells from 22 ascites specimens from 11 patients with HGSOC. We found significant inter-patient variability in the composition and functional programs of ascites cells, including immunomodulatory fibroblast sub-populations and dichotomous macrophage populations. We found that the previously described immunoreactive and mesenchymal subtypes of HGSOC, which have prognostic implications, reflect the abundance of immune infiltrates and fibroblasts rather than distinct subsets of malignant cells2. Malignant cell variability was partly explained by heterogeneous copy number alteration patterns or expression of a stemness program. Malignant cells shared expression of inflammatory programs that were largely recapitulated in single-cell RNA sequencing of ~35,000 cells from additionally collected samples, including three ascites, two primary HGSOC tumors and three patient ascites-derived xenograft models. Inhibition of the JAK/STAT pathway, which was expressed in both malignant cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts, had potent anti-tumor activity in primary short-term cultures and patient-derived xenograft models. Our work contributes to resolving the HSGOC landscape3,4,5 and provides a resource for the development of novel therapeutic approaches.	10	GSE146026_SS2	Homo sapiens	1297	243MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Unravelling subclonal heterogeneity and aggressive disease states in TNBC through single-cell RNA-seq	Mihriban Karaayvaz, Simona Cristea, [] Leif W. Ellisen	Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype characterized by extensive intratumoral heterogeneity. To investigate the underlying biology, we conducted single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) of >1500 cells from six primary TNBC. Here, we show that intercellular heterogeneity of gene expression programs within each tumor is variable and largely correlates with clonality of inferred genomic copy number changes, suggesting that genotype drives the gene expression phenotype of individual subpopulations. Clustering of gene expression profiles identified distinct subgroups of malignant cells shared by multiple tumors, including a single subpopulation associated with multiple signatures of treatment resistance and metastasis, and characterized functionally by activation of glycosphingolipid metabolism and associated innate immunity pathways. A novel signature defining this subpopulation predicts long-term outcomes for TNBC patients in a large cohort. Collectively, this analysis reveals the functional heterogeneity and its association with genomic evolution in TNBC, and uncovers unanticipated biological principles dictating poor outcomes in this disease.	10	GSE118390	Homo sapiens	1112	45MB	RNA	TPM
Determining cell type abundance and expression from bulk tissues with digital cytometry	Newman, Aaron M and Steen, [] David and others	Single-cell RNA-sequencing has emerged as a powerful technique for characterizing cellular heterogeneity, but it is currently impractical on large sample cohorts and cannot be applied to fixed specimens collected as part of routine clinical care. We previously developed an approach for digital cytometry, called CIBERSORT, that enables estimation of cell type abundances from bulk tissue transcriptomes. We now introduce CIBERSORTx, a machine learning method that extends this framework to infer cell-type-specific gene expression profiles without physical cell isolation. By minimizing platform-specific variation, CIBERSORTx also allows the use of single-cell RNA-sequencing data for large-scale tissue dissection. We evaluated the utility of CIBERSORTx in multiple tumor types, including melanoma, where single-cell reference profiles were used to dissect bulk clinical specimens, revealing cell-type-specific phenotypic states linked to distinct driver mutations and response to immune checkpoint blockade. We anticipate that digital cytometry will augment single-cell profiling efforts, enabling cost-effective, high-throughput tissue characterization without the need for antibodies, disaggregation or viable cells.	10	GSE127471	Homo sapiens	1086	14MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of tissue-resident memory T cells in human lung cancer (Smart-seq2)	James Clarke, Bharat Panwar, [] and Pandurangan Vijayan	High numbers of tissue-resident memory T (TRM) cells are associated with better clinical outcomes in cancer patients. However, the molecular characteristics that drive their efficient immune response to tumors are poorly understood. Here, single-cell and bulk transcriptomic analysis of TRM and non-TRM cells present in tumor and normal lung tissue from patients with lung cancer revealed that PD-1–expressing TRM cells in tumors were clonally expanded and enriched for transcripts linked to cell proliferation and cytotoxicity when compared with PD-1–expressing non-TRM cells. This feature was more prominent in the TRM cell subset coexpressing PD-1 and TIM-3, and it was validated by functional assays ex vivo and also reflected in their chromatin accessibility profile. This PD-1+TIM-3+ TRM cell subset was enriched in responders to PD-1 inhibitors and in tumors with a greater magnitude of CTL responses. These data highlight that not all CTLs expressing PD-1 are dysfunctional; on the contrary, TRM cells with PD-1 expression were enriched for features suggestive of superior functionality.	10	GSE111894	Homo sapiens	1084	85MB	RNA	TPM
Characterizing smoking-induced transcriptional heterogeneity in the human bronchial epithelium at single-cell resolution	Grant E. Duclos, Vitor H. Teixeira, [] Jennifer Beane	The human bronchial epithelium is composed of multiple, distinct cell types that cooperate to perform functions, such as mucociliary clearance, that defend against environmental insults. While studies have shown that smoking alters bronchial epithelial function and morphology, the precise effects of this exposure on specific cell types are not well-understood. We used single-cell RNA sequencing to profile bronchial epithelial cells from six never- and six current smokers. Unsupervised analyses identified thirteen cell clusters defined by unique combinations of nineteen distinct gene sets. Expression of a set of toxin metabolism genes localized to ciliated cells from smokers. Smoking-induced airway remodeling was characterized by a loss of club cells and extensive goblet cell hyperplasia. Finally, we identified a novel peri-goblet epithelial subpopulation in smokers that expressed a marker of bronchial premalignant lesions. Our data demonstrates that smoke exposure drives a complex landscape of cellular and molecular alterations in the human bronchial epithelium that may contribute to the onset of smoking-associated lung diseases.	10	GSE131391	Homo sapiens	968	25MB	RNA	Raw count
Transcriptomic and morphophysiological evidence for a specialized human cortical GABAergic cell type	Eszter Boldog, Trygve E. Bakken, [] Gábor Tamás	We describe convergent evidence from transcriptomics, morphology, and physiology for a specialized GABAergic neuron sub- type in human cortex. Using unbiased single-nucleus RNA sequencing, we identify ten GABAergic interneuron subtypes with combinatorial gene signatures in human cortical layer 1 and characterize a group of human interneurons with anatomical features never described in rodents, having large ‘rosehip’-like axonal boutons and compact arborization. These rosehip cells show an immunohistochemical profile (GAD1+CCK+, CNR1 SST–CALB2–PVALB–) matching a single transcriptomically defined cell type whose specific molecular marker signature is not seen in mouse cortex. Rosehip cells in layer 1 make homotypic gap junc- tions, predominantly target apical dendritic shafts of layer 3 pyramidal neurons, and inhibit backpropagating pyramidal action potentials in microdomains of the dendritic tuft. These cells are therefore positioned for potent local control of distal dendritic computation in cortical pyramidal neurons.	10	boldog2018	Homo sapiens	914	91MB	RNA	TPM
Single-cell analysis reveals fibroblast heterogeneity and myofibroblasts in systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease (cite-seq)	Eleanor Valenzi, Melissa Bulik, [] Robert Lafyatis	Objectives: Myofibroblasts are key effector cells in the extracellular matrix remodelling of systemic sclerosis-associated interstitial lung disease (SSc-ILD); however, the diversity of fibroblast populations present in the healthy and SSc-ILD lung is unknown and has prevented the specific study of the myofibroblast transcriptome. We sought to identify and define the transcriptomes of myofibroblasts and other mesenchymal cell populations in human healthy and SSc-ILD lungs to understand how alterations in fibroblast phenotypes lead to SSc-ILD fibrosis. Methods: We performed droplet-based, single-cell RNA-sequencing with integrated canonical correlation analysis of 13 explanted lung tissue specimens (56 196 cells) from four healthy control and four patients with SSc-ILD, with findings confirmed by cellular indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing in additional samples. Results: Examination of gene expression in mesenchymal cells identified two major, SPINT2hi and MFAP5hi, and one minor, WIF1hi, fibroblast populations in the healthy control lung. Combined analysis of control and SSc-ILD mesenchymal cells identified SPINT2hi, MFAP5hi, few WIF1hi fibroblasts and a new large myofibroblast population with evidence of actively proliferating myofibroblasts. We compared differential gene expression between all SSc-ILD and control mesenchymal cell populations, as well as among the fibroblast subpopulations, showing that myofibroblasts undergo the greatest phenotypic changes in SSc-ILD and strongly upregulate expression of collagens and other profibrotic genes. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate previously unrecognised fibroblast heterogeneity in SSc-ILD and healthy lungs, and define multimodal transcriptome-phenotypes associated with these populations. Our data indicate that myofibroblast differentiation and proliferation are key pathological mechanisms driving fibrosis in SSc-ILD.	10	GSE128169_cite	Homo sapiens	819	32MB	RNA, ADT	Raw count
Single-cell immune landscape of human atherosclerotic plaques (scRNA-seq - Macrophages - Plaque)	Dawn M. Fernandez, Adeeb H. Rahman, [] Chiara Giannarelli	Atherosclerosis is driven by multifaceted contributions of the immune system within the circulation and at vascular focal sites. However, specific characteristics of dysregulated immune cells within atherosclerotic lesions that lead to clinical events such as ischemic stroke or myocardial infarction are poorly understood. Here, using single-cell proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, we uncovered distinct features of both T cells and macrophages in carotid artery plaques of patients with clinically symptomatic disease (recent stroke or transient ischemic attack) compared to asymptomatic disease (no recent stroke). Plaques from symptomatic patients were characterized by a distinct subset of CD4+ T cells and by T cells that were activated and differentiated. Moreover, some T cell subsets in these plaques presented markers of T cell exhaustion. Additionally, macrophages from these plaques contained alternatively activated phenotypes, including subsets associated with plaque vulnerability. In plaques from asymptomatic patients, T cells and macrophages were activated and displayed evidence of interleukin-1β signaling. The identification of specific features of innate and adaptive immune cells in plaques that are associated with cerebrovascular events may enable the design of more precisely tailored cardiovascular immunotherapies.	10	fernandez_et_al_2019_scrna_mac_pl	Homo sapiens	747	13MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Single cell transcriptomics identifies stem cell-derived graft composition in a model of Parkinson's disease (After grafting)	Katarina Tiklova, Sara Nolbrant, [] Malin Parmar	Cell replacement is a long-standing and realistic goal for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). Cells for transplantation can be obtained from fetal brain tissue or from stem cells. However, after transplantation, dopamine (DA) neurons are seen to be a minor component of grafts, and it has remained difficult to determine the identity of other cell types. Here, we report analysis by single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) combined with comprehensive histological analyses to characterize intracerebral grafts from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and fetal tissue after functional maturation in a pre-clinical rat PD model. We show that neurons and astrocytes are major components in both fetal and stem cell-derived grafts. Additionally, we identify a cell type closely resembling a class of recently identified perivascular-like cells in stem cell-derived grafts. Thus, this study uncovers previously unknown cellular diversity in a clinically relevant cell replacement PD model.	10	GSE118412_after_grafting	Homo sapiens	746	61MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-cell multiomics sequencing and analyses of human colorectal cancer (multiplexed)	Bian, Shuhui, [] others	To better design treatments for cancer, it is important to understand the heterogeneity in tumors and how this contributes to metastasis. To examine this process, Bian et al. used a single-cell triple omics sequencing (scTrio-seq) technique to examine the mutations, transcriptome, and methylome within colorectal cancer tumors and metastases from 10 individual patients. The analysis provided insights into tumor evolution, linked DNA methylation to genetic lineages, and showed that DNA methylation levels are consistent within lineages but can differ substantially among clones.	10	GSE97693	Homo sapiens	669	40MB	RNA	TPM
Single cell transcriptomics identifies stem cell-derived graft composition in a model of Parkinson's disease (Before grafting)	Katarina Tiklova, Sara Nolbrant, [] Malin Parmar	Cell replacement is a long-standing and realistic goal for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). Cells for transplantation can be obtained from fetal brain tissue or from stem cells. However, after transplantation, dopamine (DA) neurons are seen to be a minor component of grafts, and it has remained difficult to determine the identity of other cell types. Here, we report analysis by single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) combined with comprehensive histological analyses to characterize intracerebral grafts from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and fetal tissue after functional maturation in a pre-clinical rat PD model. We show that neurons and astrocytes are major components in both fetal and stem cell-derived grafts. Additionally, we identify a cell type closely resembling a class of recently identified perivascular-like cells in stem cell-derived grafts. Thus, this study uncovers previously unknown cellular diversity in a clinically relevant cell replacement PD model.	10	GSE118412_before_grafting	Homo sapiens	660	48MB	RNA	Raw count
Single-Cell Transcriptomics of the Human Endocrine Pancreas	Yue J Wang, Jonathan Schug, [] Klaus H Kaestner	Human pancreatic islets consist of multiple endocrine cell types. To facilitate the detection of rare cellular states and uncover population heterogeneity, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on islets from multiple deceased organ donors, including children, healthy adults, and individuals with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. We developed a robust computational biology framework for cell type annotation. Using this framework, we show that α- and β-cells from children exhibit less well-defined gene signatures than those in adults. Remarkably, α- and β-cells from donors with type 2 diabetes have expression profiles with features seen in children, indicating a partial dedifferentiation process. We also examined a naturally proliferating α-cell from a healthy adult, for which pathway analysis indicated activation of the cell cycle and repression of checkpoint control pathways. Importantly, this replicating α-cell exhibited activated Sonic hedgehog signaling, a pathway not previously known to contribute to human α-cell proliferation. Our study highlights the power of single-cell RNA-seq and provides a stepping stone for future explorations of cellular heterogeneity in pancreatic endocrine cells.	10	GSE83139	Homo sapiens	635	217MB	RNA	Raw count
A pan-cancer single-cell transcriptional atlas of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (Lymphoma)	Cheng, Sijin and Li, [] Peng and others	Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) are key regulators in tumor progression, but the similarity and distinction of their fundamental properties across different tumors remain elusive. Here, by performing a pan-cancer analysis of single myeloid cells from 210 patients across 15 human cancer types, we identified distinct features of TIMs across cancer types. Mast cells in nasopharyngeal cancer were found to be associated with better prognosis and exhibited an anti-tumor phenotype with a high ratio of TNF+/VEGFA+ cells. Systematic comparison between cDC1- and cDC2-derived LAMP3+ cDCs revealed their differences in transcription factors and external stimulus. Additionally, pro-angiogenic tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) were characterized with diverse markers across different cancer types, and the composition of TIMs appeared to be associated with certain features of somatic mutations and gene expressions. Our results provide a systematic view of the highly heterogeneous TIMs and suggest future avenues for rational, targeted immunotherapies.	10	GSE154763_LYM	Homo sapiens	615	21MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Molecular signatures of multiple myeloma progression through single cell RNA-Seq	Jin Sung Jang, Ying Li, [] Jin Jen	We used single cell RNA-Seq to examine molecular heterogeneity in multiple myeloma (MM) in 597 CD138 positive cells from bone marrow aspirates of 15 patients at different stages of disease progression. 790 genes were selected by coefficient of variation (CV) method and organized cells into four groups (L1–L4) using unsupervised clustering. Plasma cells from each patient clustered into at least two groups based on gene expression signature. The L1 group contained cells from all MGUS patients having the lowest expression of genes involved in the oxidative phosphorylation, Myc targets, and mTORC1 signaling pathways (p < 1.2 × 10−14). In contrast, the expression level of these pathway genes increased progressively and were the highest in L4 group containing only cells from MM patients with t(4;14) translocations. A 44 genes signature of consistently overexpressed genes among the four groups was associated with poorer overall survival in MM patients (APEX trial, p < 0.0001; HR, 1.83; 95% CI, 1.33–2.52), particularly those treated with bortezomib (p < 0.0001; HR, 2.00; 95% CI, 1.39–2.89). Our study, using single cell RNA-Seq, identified the most significantly affected molecular pathways during MM progression and provided a novel signature predictive of patient prognosis and treatment stratification.	10	GSE118900	Homo sapiens	597	32MB	RNA	TPM
Single-cell multiomics sequencing and analyses of human colorectal cancer (Tang protocol)	Bian, Shuhui, [] others	To better design treatments for cancer, it is important to understand the heterogeneity in tumors and how this contributes to metastasis. To examine this process, Bian et al. used a single-cell triple omics sequencing (scTrio-seq) technique to examine the mutations, transcriptome, and methylome within colorectal cancer tumors and metastases from 10 individual patients. The analysis provided insights into tumor evolution, linked DNA methylation to genetic lineages, and showed that DNA methylation levels are consistent within lineages but can differ substantially among clones.	10	GSE97693_FPKM	Homo sapiens	500	64MB	RNA	FPKM
A survey of human brain transcriptome diversity at the single cell level	Spyros Darmanis, Steven A. Sloan, [] Stephen R. Quake	The human brain is a tissue of vast complexity in terms of the cell types it comprises. Conventional approaches to classifying cell types in the human brain at single cell resolution have been limited to exploring relatively few markers and therefore have provided a limited molecular characterization of any given cell type. We used single cell RNA sequencing on 466 cells to capture the cellular complexity of the adult and fetal human brain at a whole transcriptome level. Healthy adult temporal lobe tissue was obtained during surgical procedures where otherwise normal tissue was removed to gain access to deeper hippocampal pathology in patients with medical refractory seizures. We were able to classify individual cells into all of the major neuronal, glial, and vascular cell types in the brain. We were able to divide neurons into individual communities and show that these communities preserve the categorization of interneuron subtypes that is typically observed with the use of classic interneuron markers. We then used single cell RNA sequencing on fetal human cortical neurons to identify genes that are differentially expressed between fetal and adult neurons and those genes that display an expression gradient that reflects the transition between replicating and quiescent fetal neuronal populations. Finally, we observed the expression of major histocompatibility complex type I genes in a subset of adult neurons, but not fetal neurons. The work presented here demonstrates the applicability of single cell RNA sequencing on the study of the adult human brain and constitutes a first step toward a comprehensive cellular atlas of the human brain.	10	GSE67835	Homo sapiens	466	26MB	RNA	Raw count
Neutrophils escort circulating tumour cells to enable cell cycle progression (human)	Barbara Maria Szczerba, Francesc Castro-Giner, [] Nicola Aceto	A better understanding of the features that define the interaction between cancer cells and immune cells is important for the development of new cancer therapies1. However, focus is often given to interactions that occur within the primary tumour and its microenvironment, whereas the role of immune cells during cancer dissemination in patients remains largely uncharacterized2,3. Circulating tumour cells (CTCs) are precursors of metastasis in several types of cancer4,5,6, and are occasionally found within the bloodstream in association with non-malignant cells such as white blood cells (WBCs)7,8. The identity and function of these CTC-associated WBCs, as well as the molecular features that define the interaction between WBCs and CTCs, are unknown. Here we isolate and characterize individual CTC-associated WBCs, as well as corresponding cancer cells within each CTC–WBC cluster, from patients with breast cancer and from mouse models. We use single-cell RNA sequencing to show that in the majority of these cases, CTCs were associated with neutrophils. When comparing the transcriptome profiles of CTCs associated with neutrophils against those of CTCs alone, we detect a number of differentially expressed genes that outline cell cycle progression, leading to more efficient metastasis formation. Further, we identify cell–cell junction and cytokine–receptor pairs that define CTC–neutrophil clusters, representing key vulnerabilities of the metastatic process. Thus, the association between neutrophils and CTCs drives cell cycle progression within the bloodstream and expands the metastatic potential of CTCs, providing a rationale for targeting this interaction in treatment of breast cancer.	10	GSE109761_hu	Homo sapiens	357	41MB	RNA	Read count
Molecular Diversity of Midbrain Development in Mouse, Human, and Stem Cells (Human - Induced pluripotent stem cell)	Gioele La Manno, Daniel Gyllborg, [] Sten Linnarsson	Understanding human embryonic ventral midbrain is of major interest for Parkinson's disease. However, the cell types, their gene expression dynamics, and their relationship to commonly used rodent models remain to be defined. We performed single-cell RNA sequencing to examine ventral midbrain development in human and mouse. We found 25 molecularly defined human cell types, including five subtypes of radial glia-like cells and four progenitors. In the mouse, two mature fetal dopaminergic neuron subtypes diversified into five adult classes during postnatal development. Cell types and gene expression were generally conserved across species, but with clear differences in cell proliferation, developmental timing, and dopaminergic neuron development. Additionally, we developed a method to quantitatively assess the fidelity of dopaminergic neurons derived from human pluripotent stem cells, at a single-cell level. Thus, our study provides insight into the molecular programs controlling human midbrain development and provides a foundation for the development of cell replacement therapies.	10	GSE76381_iPSC	Homo sapiens	337	7MB	RNA	Raw count
IFNγ-Dependent Tissue-Immune Homeostasis Is Co-opted in the Tumor Microenvironment	Christopher J. Nirschl, Mayte Suárez-Fariñas, [] Niroshana Anandasabapathy	Homeostatic programs balance immune protection and self-tolerance. Such mechanisms likely impact autoimmunity and tumor formation, respectively. How homeostasis is maintained and impacts tumor surveillance is unknown. Here, we find that different immune mononuclear phagocytes share a conserved steady-state program during differentiation and entry into healthy tissue. IFNγ is necessary and sufficient to induce this program, revealing a key instructive role. Remarkably, homeostatic and IFNγ-dependent programs enrich across primary human tumors, including melanoma, and stratify survival. Single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) reveals enrichment of homeostatic modules in monocytes and DCs from human metastatic melanoma. Suppressor-of-cytokine-2 (SOCS2) protein, a conserved program transcript, is expressed by mononuclear phagocytes infiltrating primary melanoma and is induced by IFNγ. SOCS2 limits adaptive anti-tumoral immunity and DC-based priming of T cells in vivo, indicating a critical regulatory role. These findings link immune homeostasis to key determinants of anti-tumoral immunity and escape, revealing co-opting of tissue-specific immune development in the tumor microenvironment.	10	GSE100337	Homo sapiens	333	32MB	RNA	Log-normalized
Spatial and single-cell transcriptional profiling identifies functionally distinct human dermal fibroblast subpopulations	Philippeos, Christina and Telerman, [] Magnus D and others	Previous studies have shown that mouse dermis is composed of functionally distinct fibroblast lineages. To explore the extent of fibroblast heterogeneity in human skin, we used a combination of comparative spatial transcriptional profiling of human and mouse dermis and single-cell transcriptional profiling of human dermal fibroblasts. We show that there are at least four distinct fibroblast populations in adult human skin, not all of which are spatially segregated. We define markers permitting their isolation and show that although marker expression is lost in culture, different fibroblast subpopulations retain distinct functionality in terms of Wnt signaling, responsiveness to IFN-γ, and ability to support human epidermal reconstitution when introduced into decellularized dermis. These findings suggest that ex vivo expansion or in vivo ablation of specific fibroblast subpopulations may have therapeutic applications in wound healing and diseases characterized by excessive fibrosis.	10	GSE109822	Homo sapiens	184	12MB	RNA	Read count
